Adapting Lean Six Sigma for a Non-Profit Organization
Jocelyn De Leon
California Polytechnic State University
Liberal Arts and Engineering Studies
June 2016

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

2

Table of Contents
Abstract ............................................................................................................................................4
What is Lean Six Sigma? .................................................................................................................5
Nonprofit Case Studies ....................................................................................................................6
What is a Nonprofit? ........................................................................................................................8
Common Nonprofit Challenges .......................................................................................................8
GRID Alternatives Warehouse ......................................................................................................10
DMAIC Methodology……………………………………………………………………………11
Implementation of Improvement Plans…………………………………………………………..22
Results and Usability Study………………………………………………………………...........25
Adapting Lean Six Sigma to GRID Alternatives………………………………………………...29
Conclusion……………………………………………………………………………....…...…..30
Works Cited …………………………………………………………………………………......31

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

Table of Figures
Figure 1 Define- Spaghetti Diagram……………………………………………………..……13
Figure 2 Measure- Pareto Chart…………………………………………………………….…14
Figure 3 Measure- Direct Time Motion Study………………………………………………..15
Figure 4 Analyze- Fishbone Diagram…………………………………………………………16
Figure 5 Analyze- 5 Why 1 How Analysis………………………...………………………….17
Figure 6 Improve- 5S Plan…………………………………………………………………….18
Figure 7 Improve- Kanban bins with tags……………………………………………………..19
Figure 8 Improve- Red and blue colored Kanban bins………………………………………..20
Figure 9 Control- Check Process……………………………………………………………...21
Figure 10 Control- Control Plan……………………………………………….……………...22
Figure 11 Before Pictures of Warehouse Space……………………………………………....24
Figure 12 After Pictures of Warehouse Space………………………………………...………25
Figure 13 Usability Study Sample Bill of Materials…………………………………………..27
Figure 14 Map of Warehouse Space for Usability Study……………………………………..27
Figure 15 Usability Study Results…………………………………………………………….28

3

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

Abstract
Lean Six Sigma is a process improvement practice most commonly used in large scale
manufacturing and health care industries to improve performance and efficiency. The goal of
Lean Six Sigma is to improve efficiency, consistency, and focus on value added elements.
Over the years, Lean Six Sigma has evolved from being primarily a manufacturing practice to
serving more service based industries such as healthcare and government. However, Lean Six
Sigma has yet to be implemented in the non-profit sector. This technical report outlines the
importance of identifying the unique characteristics of the organization you wish to improve
and then adapting lean six sigma techniques accordingly. This report will specifically look at
the challenges faced by a non-profit organization, GRID Alternatives, and evaluate how Lean
Six Sigma techniques can be adapted to improve their warehouse procedures and conditions.

4

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

What is Lean Six Sigma?
Lean Six Sigma is a methodology that focuses on continuous process improvement.
Lean Six Sigma is a combination of Lean Manufacturing and Six Sigma. Lean Manufacturing
focuses on people involvement, the business philosophy, doing the right thing, creating a more
predictable process, and most importantly reducing waste. The eight types of waste in Lean
are defects, overproduction, waiting, neglecting resources, transportation, inventory, motion,
and extra processing. The goal is to develop “eyes for waste” so that you can recognize and
eliminate the unnecessary or non-value added steps in a process. Six Sigma focuses on applied
statistics, tools to improve business processes, creating a more capable process, and reducing
process variation. Six Sigma really focuses on the numbers, the statistical definition of Six
Sigma is striving for a process to be 99.9 percent capable and producing only 3.4 defects per
million opportunities (DPMO). Six Sigma is about reducing the number of defects and errors
while simultaneously lowering costs, saving time, and improving customer satisfaction.
Lean Manufacturing and Six Sigma together are much more powerful. Lean Six Sigma
is defined as a “well-structured theory based methodology that improves performance,
develops effective leadership, customer satisfaction and bottom line results” (Zhang). Lean
Six Sigma is very project based and strives for continuous improvement.
Lean Six Sigma originally came from manufacturing industries and has now found its
way to services. “Lean Six Sigma: A Literature Review” mentions that in addition to
manufacturing Lean Six Sigma has also become very common in healthcare, since defects and

5

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION
errors are even less tolerable in this industry. Lean Six Sigma is not only in healthcare and
manufacturing but is also seen in government, the military, and financial services. Literature
reveals that Lean Six Sigma is beneficial for different industries with little modifications per
industry requirement. In addition, it has been stated that Lean Six Sigma is “equally beneficial
for manufacturing or services concerns in large or small scale organizations” (Zhang). These
finding come to show how applicable Lean Six Sigma can be in different organizations
whether it’s based on type of industry or size of the organization.
However, it is still suggested to continue research for implementing Lean Six Sigma
where financial capability is a hurdle (Zhang), which brings our attention to a specific industry
that needs more Lean Six Sigma implementation research: the nonprofit sector.
Nonprofit Case Studies
Currently, there are very few literary works that examine the implementation of Lean
Six Sigma in the nonprofit sector. There is a case study by Chen-Yang Cheng and Pu-Yuan
Chang from Tunghai University in Taichung, Taiwan that examined how to implement Lean
Six Sigma in a non-profit organization that provided wheelchairs, walkers, and various
assistive devices for people with disabilities. Their work is titled “Implementation of the Lean
Six Sigma Framework in Non-profit Organisations: A Case Study.” Cheng and Chang
mention that prior to their case study, which took place in 2012, the Lean Six Sigma process
had not yet been applied to non-profit organizations. Their case study demonstrates that they
were able to improve efficiency by reducing transfer and delay times, and raising process
cycle efficiency by 27% and 28% (Cheng, Chang). However, at the end of their case study,
they emphasizes the importance of recognizing the unique characteristics of the non-profit
organization you wish to improve stating that it can “provide a reference to improve the

6

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION
efficiency of non-profit organizations’ services.” This case study reveals the importance of
recognizing the culture and structure of the organization you plan to work with because it can
reveal certain queues that may help improve different processes’ within the organization.
Another relevant literary source is “The Role of Process Improvement in the Nonprofit Organization” by Vikki C. Lassiter, a master student from the University of
Pennsylvania. This thesis case study is different from Cheng and Chang’s because it focuses
on the application of the process improvement concepts in general and then applies those
specific principles to nonprofit organizations. Process improvement in general is different
from Lean Six Sigma because as Lassiter states Lean Six Sigma methods and tools are
“somewhat limiting, since they tend to examine only individual processes rather than
integrating these processes into an examination of the complete system at work within an
organization.” Lassiter looks at process improvement in non-profit organizations as a whole
and assesses the understanding of process improvement culture in an organization as well as
overall organizational growth.
These literary works support the purpose of this technical report demonstrating that
there is a need for more Lean Six Sigma case studies in the nonprofit sector. This report also
recognizes the importance of paying close attention to the unique characteristics of the nonprofit organization services’ and processes because they provide queues and references for not
only improving process performance and efficiency but also help in creating a culture of
understanding process improvement in the organization.
This report is a documentation of the implementation of Lean Six Sigma process
improvement tools at GRID Alternatives’ Warehouse, and the results and recommendations
for adapting Lean Six Sigma for their specific needs. However, first it is important to

7

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION
understand the type of organization that GRID Alternatives, what makes it unique and some
challenges this organization faces.

What is a Nonprofit?
A non-profit is an organization that has no owner, stockholder or trustee that shares in
the profits or losses of the organization. Nonprofits exist not to make revenue but to promote a
mission that generally enhances community welfare (Lassiter). GRID Alternatives is a nonprofit solar organization that provide solar electric systems for low income families. The
GRID Alternatives’ mission is to “make renewable energy technology and training available
to underserved communities” (GRID Alternatives). The GRID Alternatives goal is not to
make money but to provide a service for low income families. By installing solar, GRID
Alternatives is not only reducing our carbon footprint, but is also providing families with
energy savings and up to 10 volunteers per install with free solar job training (Non-profit
group).
Common Nonprofit Challenges
Nonprofit organizations are faced with a variety of challenges on a day to day basis.
Some of these challenges include a rapidly growing demand for their services, pressures to
incorporate a fee for the services being provided, competition from for-profit organizations,
and many more that require a consistent evaluation of ongoing organization effectiveness
(Lassiter). GRID Alternatives for instance constantly faces all of these challenges. With the
changing economy more and more homeowners are meeting the low income requirements and
people are seeking job training opportunities. Therefore there is an increasing in demand for
GRID Alternatives services.

8

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION
In addition, to the growing demand for their services, GRID Alternatives also faces the
pressure of charging a service fee. According to Energy Informative, solar electric systems are
not cheap and states that “a residential electric systems cost upwards of thirty thousand
dollars” (Non-profit group). In order to help finance the expenses of these solar electric
systems GRID Alternatives has made an effort to partner with Third Party Owners (TPOs) to
help cover the expenses. GRID Alternatives has also recently incorporated a homeowner
contribution fee to help the program continue its efforts. Homeowners are asked to contribute
two cents per kilowatt of energy their electric system generates every month. On average a
homeowners pay about eight dollars a month to help the program continue its mission to
providing energy savings and job training for underserved communities (Non-profit group).
Lastly, GRID Alternatives is also facing more and more competition from for-profit
solar providers. Today, there are numerous solar company providers that sell and rent
residential solar electric systems to homeowners, some of these companies include Solar City,
Sun Run, Vivent Solar, and REC Solar. These companies are competitors to GRID
Alternatives because they are selling or renting solar to homeowners who may have qualified
for their services. To make matters worse, because they are for-profit companies they have
more money to spend on marketing and advertising. Therefore, GRID Alternatives struggles to
compete with these large for-profit organizations. Every low income home that receives solar
from a for-profit company means that that is one less family that GRID Alternatives can
provide a service too and one less install that could have been an opportunity to provide job
training to the community. A growing demand for services, financial pressures, and
competition from for-profit companies are just a few organizational challenges GRID

9

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION
Alternatives faces. These challenges come to show that there is a need to consistently
reevaluate the effectiveness of this organization's operations.
So how does Lean Six Sigma come into the mix? Well you see as Lassiter states
“every organization, whether it is large, medium, or small, profit-driven or not-for-profit, has
one thing in common: their operations requires processes. Processes are the fundamental way
of thinking about operations and managing an organization.” It is really important to plan a
systematic way to measure, analyze, and improve organizational performance and Lean Six
Sigma is a very applicable and methodological approach to do so.
However, it is important to clarify that the purpose of this report is to not to evaluate
the operations of the GRID Alternatives organization as a whole but instead to look at a
specific process and evaluate how effective that process performance is. Lean Six Sigma is
about refining and continuously improving processes within an organization. Certainly the
goal is improve the overall organization as a whole, but realistically speaking the best way to
tackle such an enormous task is to look into the components of the organization and tweak,
modify, and improve those smaller components. Therefore, for this particular case study we
are going to focus on a GRID Alternatives Warehouse and implement Lean Six Sigma Tools
to evaluate the performance of the warehouse procedures and conditions.
GRID Alternatives Warehouse
GRID Alternatives is a relatively large organization and has numerous offices in
California alone, and also has offices in Colorado and New York. However, for this particular
project we are going to focus on the Central Coast Office in Atascadero, California. Within
this particular office we are going to take a look at the warehouse space and the procedures by
which this warehouse operates.

10

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

11

This warehouse space is primarily used by the construction staff at GRID Alternatives.
The warehouse is the area in which all the solar modules, conduit, hardware, supplies, and
equipment are stored and kept. The construction staff not only uses this space to store all the
supplies and equipment but also uses the space to prepare and load for a build as well as
unload after a build. This case study will apply the DMAIC method to evaluate the
performance of this warehouse space and use Lean Six Sigma tools to make suggestions on
how to improve efficiency.
DMAIC Methodology
The DMAIC method stands for Define, Measure, Analyze, Improve, and Control.
DMAIC is the main method for Lean Six Sigma implementation. It is used to identify problem
areas, define root causes and constraints to an issue, measures current state processes, analyze
the data and observations collected, make recommendations to improve the current state
process, and then propose ways to control and monitor improvement changes. The DMAIC
process was used to improve warehouse conditions and procedures at GRID Alternatives. The
process was implemented over a period of 2 months and consisted of a phase for each DMAIC
step. Each DMAIC step utilized at least 2 Lean tools to complete each phase. Some of the
Lean tools used were: Fishbone Diagram, Five S, Five Whys, Standardized Work, Pareto
Charts, and Time Studies.
The Define phase of the GRID Alternatives Warehouse Improvement project consisted of
staff interviews, a project charter, and a spaghetti diagram. The staff members that were
interviewed for the define phase were Carlos Chairez, the Warehouse Manager, and Xavier
Villazana, the Construction Manager. The reason these two staff members were selected to be
interviewed in this phase of the project was because they were the most knowledgeable in how

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

12

the warehouse space was currently being used and they were the most familiar with procedures
and issues being faced. Some of the questions that asked were: What is the most common
bottleneck or constraint? What is the general process or procedure for how things get done? Who
is responsible? What issues are most commonly neglected? The interview questions were
particular designed to gather information about the reoccurring problems or issues. After
interviews the next step was establishing a project charter.
A project charter was created to help define the scope, parameters, and mission of this
warehouse improvement project. The project charter outlined deliverables, expectations,
milestones, completion dates, and resources needed. This tool helped to clearly communicate the
purpose, expectations, and deliverables of this project to the supervising sponsor, Carlos Chairez.
The project charter stated that the problem was that it was taking the construction staff a really
long time to load and unload the equipment before and after an installation build. The goal was
to improve the current warehouse procedures and conditions and to make loading and unloading
processes easier and quicker. In addition, the project scope also included making
recommendations on how to improve warehouse processes and how to control the changes that
were going to be implemented. In addition, to making suggestions on how to improve the
warehouse this project was actually going to implementation the proposed plans. The project
scope did not include monitoring long term warehouse progress.
A spaghetti diagram was also used in the define phase of this project to narrow the scope
even further. The spaghetti diagram helped identify where in the warehouse space the process
improvement project would take place. The spaghetti diagram outlined the layout of the
warehouse work space and illustrated the physical flow of materials/equipment relative to their
physical location. Especially, when construction staff loaded and unloaded equipment before and

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

13

after an installation build. Figure 1 below shows the material and equipment flow in red and
reveals that the majority of the material flow is in the inventory shelves and tools area and very

little to no flow occurs in the shipment container and crates area.
Figure 1 Spaghetti Diagram used in Define phase illustrates the work flow and material
flow at the GRID Alternatives Warehouse space.
The interviews revealed the problem, the project charter outlined the project goals and
plans and the spaghetti diagram showed the specific problem area. The following step in the
DMAIC process is measure.
The Measure phase for this project consisted of a Pareto chart and a Time study. A Pareto
chart was used to measure the frequency of reoccurring issues and was then used to rank the
priority of each issue in descending order. The Figure 2 below is the Pareto chart that was
created and to help determine which issues to address first. The Pareto chart show that the most
reoccurring issues were: old and outdated inventory taking up space, the need to trash or recycle
miscellaneous items, and the need sort and organize unloaded equipment. These 3 issues alone

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

14

accounted for 79% of the warehouse procedures and conditions problems. Therefore, the Pareto
chart suggests that these issues had the greatest priority.

Figure 2 A Parto Chart was created in the measure phase to identify the most reoccurring issues
in the loading and unloading process.
Next, a Direct Time Motion study was conducted to determine how long it was really
taking the construction staff to load and unload equipment and supplies after a build. The Direct
Time Motion study measured cycle time, including a performance and allowance rating and
calculated normal and standard time. The Direct Time Motion study was useful because it helped
determine the approximate amount of time it took to complete specific task (cycle time).
Normal time is the basic time it takes to complete a specified task and is calculated by
multiplying the performance rating (difficulty of task) and the cycle time of each process step
and then adding all those times. Standard time is the time it takes to complete a specified task
while taking allowances or break time into consideration. The standard time is calculated by
adding basic time and allowances. The figure below show the data that was collected for this
time study.

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

15

Figure 3 This is the Time Study data collection table which shows that the standard time was
8.75 min and normal times was 7.17 min.
This Direct Time Motion study indicates that the normal time to sort through items,
return and store an item to its designated location, and position or restock accordingly, took
approximately seven minutes. When considering an allowance of 22% due to the weather
conditions, standing for long periods of time, lifting, and bending the standard time to complete
these tasks was about nine minutes. The performance rating or difficulty of each element/ task in
the process was one meaning that they had relatively low complexity ratings. The average cycle
time to return and store equipment was about 2 minutes, to sort through items was about 4
minutes, and to position or restock accordingly was about 1 minute. Therefore, on average the
most time consuming element was to sort through miscellaneous items. The measure phase
identified which issues were occurring the most: old and outdated inventory were taking up
space, miscellaneous items needed to be trashed or recycled, and unloaded items needed to be
sorted and organized, and which task took the longest to do: sorting through items. The next
phase was to analyze these issues and tasks in attempt to discover the root causes.

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

16

The Analyze phase consisted of a fishbone diagram and 5 Why 1 How analysis. These
Lean Six Sigma Tools were used in the analyze phase because they helped investigate the root
causes, issues, and determining factors for why the construction staff was taking so long to load
and unload equipment before and after an installation build.
This Fishbone diagram showed that the key factors that were affecting the warehouse
conditions were the people, material, equipment, and procedures. The people that had the
greatest impact on the warehouse environment was the warehouse manager and construction
staff. The most common issues with regards to material, machines, and equipment was that items
were misplaced, old, or outdated. In addition, the most complex and time consuming process was
sorting through inventory and finding a place to store items. The figure below shows the
Fishbone diagram that was created to assess the different factors and issues in the warehouse.

Figure 4 This Fishbone Diagram was used in the analyze phase and highlights the significant
factors: the warehouse manager, construction staff, old outdated material and equipment,
misplaced equipment, and the sorting through items process when loading and unloading after a
construction build.

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

17

The 5 Why-1 How analysis tool was then used to delve deeper in the issues highlighted in
the Fishbone Diagram. The 5 Why analysis tool helps gain a better understanding of how the
warehouse issues are related in terms of cause and effect. Figure 5 below shows the 5 Why –1
How analysis and shows that the root cause for why the warehouse conditions are not as
organized as they could be, is because the warehouse space is understaffed and the person
currently maintaining the warehouse is overworked. Therefore, regular warehouse procedures
were being neglected and items were accumulating fast, making the sorting and storing of items
time consuming to do. Now that the root causes had been identified the next step was to
determine what actions to take to improve the warehouse space.

Figure 5 A 5 Why and 1 How Analysis tool was used in the analyze phase to identify the
possible root cause for why the current inventory system was not as organized as it could be.

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

18

The Improve Phase was about identifying which lean tools could be used to improve the
warehouse conditions and procedures. The team leader and sponsor determined that a 5S and
Kanban projects would be best improvement project to do because it would help standardize the
warehouse space.
5S is an organizational tool that is used to improve visual controls in a workspace,
reinforce safety practices, and support worker performance. 5 S stands for Sort, Straighten,
Standardize, Scrub, and Sustain. This tool was selected because it would help organize
warehouse inventory and procedures. In addition, 5S could help decrease time spent searching
for tools or supplies.
The 5S plan was to sort inventory items according to use: in use vs non-opened (new).
All items were also to be straightened by grouping items of similar function and use, returning
items to original storage location, and positioning all the items according to inventory levels. For
standardization, items were to be designated a permanent area and labeled or tagged for visual
controls. The warehouse was to be kept clean by wiping down surfaces, keeping walkways and
work areas clear, and keeping inventory off the floor and in boxes or packaging. Lastly, for
sustaining organization a Kanban replenishment system, a check process, and visual controls
were to be implemented. The 5S plan is shown below in Figure 6.

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

19

Figure 6 A 5S plan was created to help improve the current warehouse space conditions.
A Kanban Replenishment system was also planned to organize the equipment, tools, and
supplies because Kanban’s specify how many parts or items need to be restocked. Kanban
systems also eliminate waste by preventing the accumulation of excess inventory and visual
obstructions, preserving storage space, reducing long cycle times, and avoiding unnecessary
inventory transactions. A two bin Kanban replenishment system was specifically recommended
to aid inventory replenishment. The two bins system is meant to communicate when there is and
isn’t a need to replenish. The bins are to be placed in front of one another and ideally in two
different colors (ex. red and blue). For example, when the red bin is in front then that indicates to
replenish the inventory stock (alert) and if the blue bin is in front then do not replenish. In
addition, to the different colored bins it was also proposed to attach tags and barcodes on the
bins. The tags were to be labeled “restock” and “stock card.” These tags are to be visual controls
that clearly communicate and reinforce inventory status this is in addition to the color coded
bins. Another proposed idea was to incorporate a barcode system that corresponded vendor and
inventory status which could help simplify the replenishment process. The Figures 7 and 8
below show examples of what a two bin Kanban system could look like. Now that the plan on
how to improve the warehouse was decided on it was time to brainstorm how the improvement
changes would be maintained.
Figure 7 Example of Kanban bins with visual control stock cards.

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

20

Figure 8 Example of color coded Kanban bins.

For the Control phase of the DMAIC process the team leader and sponsor brainstormed
methods and tools that could be used to sustain the improvement changes in the
warehouse. They proposed that a Check Process and a Control Plan would to be implemented.
A Check Process is a quick and effective verification tool that can be used to evaluate
process conformance. This tool was proposed because it could be used as a guideline to make
sure that the basics were consistently met. The Check Process stands for Correct, Housekeeping,
Equipment, Contain, and Keep Doing it and these are the metrics the Check Process accounts
for.
For each Check Process measure it is important to include questions that truly reflect the
current state. For instance, for the Correct measure the question to be asked is “Are tools,
equipment, and materials in their designated location? Or are items labeled and stored
correctly?” For Housekeeping, it was proposed to ask questions about workspace cleanliness,
organization, safety hazards, and whether or not there was an ample and comfortable amount of
space to work in. For the Equipment measure, questions tried to verify if equipment was in
proper working condition, was well calibrated, and accounted for in the inventory. For
Containment the measures ensured that defects or mishaps had not passed on to the following
steps in the process. And lastly, the Check Process asks and makes sure that process is

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

21

consistently being done and is part of the daily routine. Figure 9 below shows the Check
Process in greater detail.

Figure 9 Check Process plan to help maintain the improved conditions of Warehouse space.
The other control tool was to implement a Control Plan, which is a centralized document
that keeps track of the status of all significant process characteristics. This tools was
recommended to help control warehouse conditions because it would provide a visual record of
project status and aid as a reminder to get certain tasks done that may affect process flow. The
proposed processes to keep track of in the Control Plan were inspections for inventory standards,
trash, reuse, and recycle items, and safety inspections. These are useful processes to keep track
of because they could alert the warehouse manager of the urgency or need to follow up with a
certain action and how often. The control plan is very useful because it really helps reinforce the

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

22

Lean principle of continuous improvement. The figure below shows the Control Plan in greater
detail.

Figure 10 The control plan to help keep track of the status of improvement tasks.
The discoveries and proposed project plans that resulted from the DMAIC process
steps were to implement 5S, a Kanban Replenishment system, a Check Process, and a Control
Plan. The goal was to standardize inventory items and procedures by eliminating tedious tasks
such has having to continuously sort and organize items and creating a designated spot and
location for all items so that they could easily be put back in their spot and found. Even though
these proposed plans for improving the warehouse procedures and conditions were valid and
logical using the DMAIC method, the actual implementation of these project didn’t exactly go
as planned.
Implementation of Improvement Plan
Carlos Chairez, the warehouse manager and I spent about 3 weeks cleaning, sorting,
organizing, and standardizing the warehouse tools and shelves area. We sorted through
miscellaneous items such as trash, recyclable items, outdated inventory items, current

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION
inventory items, and new delivered items. We then got rid of outdated and recyclable items to
create space for the current and new inventory items. We then created permanent designated
areas for the different items, tools, and equipment and created stations for the different
activities/ tasks that took place in the warehouse space. For instance, we made a loading table
area in the shed, an unloading table in the open space shed, and a drop off table for new
inventory items that are delivered. The warehouse manager and I decided to created different
work station areas so that the different types of inventory items would be kept separate from
one another. At each work or task station we also included different accommodations to
simplify the processes at each station. At the unloading table we added bins where employees
could easily leave or pull loose bits, nails, and screws after each build. Then the loading table
inside the shed was designed so that inventory stock items could be pulled and loaded into the
large storage bins that get loaded into the construction trailer and the new inventory items
table has plenty of open space to separate items by type. Lastly, we labeled each shelf
according to the type or group of item that was stored there and we also labeled each container
according to its contents. Figures 11 and 12 below show the before and after conditions of the
warehouse shelves and tool area.
What made this particular implementation project unique was that the warehouse
manager and I had to be creative and resourceful when implementing our warehouse
improvement plan keeping in mind that there was little to no funds to support our project.
First, space was limited and not all items had a designated storage location so rather than
investing in more storage space such as expanding the warehouse tools and shelves area we
decided to make better use of the space we had. So that was why we trashed, repurposed, and
recycled items we didn’t need or use. Second, we didn’t have the funds to buy new shelves/

23

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION
cabinet space or buy bins to sort and store all the inventory items. So what Chairez and I did
was make our own new shelves using wood pallets that weren’t being used and transformed a
compartment cart in to separate shelves, and used the railing of the cart to mount on the wall
and create an additional shelf space. The different colored bins of the compartment cart were
also used to group different item types by color. For example, yellow bins were used for
conduit items, blue bins were used for junction box items, and red bins were used for
miscellaneous hardware bits. Figure 11 show an image on bottom right corner of the
compartment cart that was transformed into separate bins and shelf space. All in all, Chiarez
and I sorted through the different items in the warehouse shelves and tool area, created more
open space for different work stations and inventory items, designated specific locations for
different items, and labeled each shelf and bin accordingly. The next phase of this
improvement project was to test if our project had been effective.

Figure 11 The image above shows the initial conditions of the warehouse shelves and
tools area before the warehouse improvement project began. It also includes the standard lead

24

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION
time of 8 min which is the time it took an employees to start unloading an item and then finish
and return it to its designated location.

Figure 12 The images in this figure show the after conditions of the warehouse tools
and shelves areas and shows the labeled shelves, open space, new shelves, and work stations.
The image also shows that after conditions were improved the new standard lead time was 3.5
minutes.
Results and Usability Study
Once the warehouse improvement project had been implemented a direct time motion
study was conducted to test whether or not the time to load and unload items after a
construction build had changed. Similar to the initial time study conducted in the define phase
of the DMAIC process, employees were timed from when they unloaded an item from the
construction trailer and finished returning an item to its location or original condition. The
initial lead time for staff to load and unload after a build was about 8 minutes per task or
activity. However, after implementing the improvement project in the warehouse space the
lead time decreased to about 3.5 minutes per task or activity. The time study revealed that the
change was significant, and construction staff would being saving about 4.5 minutes with the

25

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION
new changes. In addition, to verifying that lead time had changed it was also important to test
how legible the warehouse space was to others.
Reducing the lead time for construction staff to load and unload after a build was the
initial goal, Chairez and I set to improve. However, we came to realize that it would also be
beneficial to create a usability test to see how legible the space was to someone who isn’t
necessarily familiar with the warehouse. We thought that if we had really standardized and
simplified the warehouse space then that meant that anyone could find what they needed and
find their way around the warehouse. So we decided to work on designing a usability test. We
figured that this would be a beneficial study to conduct because it could not only tell us how
well we improved the space but also reveal some great insight as to how we could continue to
improve the warehouse space. The fundamental principle of Lean Six Sigma is continuous
improvement which is why this usability study was so important.
The design of the usability study was that at least two GRID Alternatives staff
members not in the construction department, would participate and each receive the same
sample Bill of Materials for a random installation build and ask them to locate the items on the
list. The participants would have 15 minutes to find as many items as they can and would also
be provided with a map of the warehouse shelves and tools areas to help the get a better
understanding of the space. Figures 13 and 14 below show the sample BOM and maps used
for the study.

26

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

Figure 13 The sample BOM list that was used for the Usability Study.

Figure 14 Illustrations of the warehouse set up in the uncovered shed area in the warehouse.
This figure was used in the usability study to familiarize participants with the space.
When we tested the usability study we had a two participants’ one from the workforce
and development department and the other from the headquarters team. Neither of these
participants were familiar with the logistics and set up of the construction warehouse space.
Chairez and I led the study and we gave each participant maps of the warehouse space and a
Bill of Materials. They had 15 minutes to find as many items on the list and in the end the

27

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION
results were: workforce and development participant found 9 out of 17 items on the list and
the headquarters intern found 11 out of 17 items on the list. Figure 15 below shows the BOM
with red lines for the missing items that the headquarters intern missed.

Figure 15 The list of BOM from the usability test of the headquarters intern who got 11 out of
17 items correct.
The usability study revealed some insightful recommendations to continue improving
the warehouse space and conditions. For instance, the study results themselves showed
specific items on the bill of material that were difficult to find for both participants which
indicates that perhaps they weren’t placed in a legible or intuitive location or need to be
labeled differently. In addition, the design of the study itself gave Chairez and I the idea to
putting up maps of the shelves and tools areas for construction staff to also see and reference
to not only help them find items but also know where items are expected to be returned and
kept. Another idea, that came to mind was making modifications to the bill of materials and
group certain items on the list to reduce the amount of walking back and forth finding items in
different locations. All in all, the usability study was very helpful because it really helped
reinforce the Lean Six Sigma philosophy of continuous improvement.

28

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

29

Adapting Lean Six Sigma to GRID Alternatives
Implementing Lean Six Sigma at the GRID Alternatives warehouse was effective and we
were able to demonstrate a positive change. However, realistically it is important to think what
impact did this warehouse improvement project have on the organization as a whole and how can
Lean Six Sigma be adapted so that GRID Alternatives, the nonprofit organization not just the
warehouse can implement this practice. Lean Six Sigma is a very practical and applicable
methodology however it does require to be modified depending on the project and especially the
organization. The case studies previously mentioned in this report highlighted the importance
recognizing and paying attention to the unique characteristics of the project or organization you
wish to apply Lean Six Sigma to. That is why it is important to understand that the culture of an
organization in order to begin to adapt lean six sigma accordingly. GRID Alternatives is a laid
back and casual organization and the best way to encourage Lean Six Sigma practice is to model
the behavior. This can be done as simply as posting images or maps of how a certain area is
expected to be maintained. In addition to modeling the behavior it is very important to
communicate to staff or team members what the goals are and explaining Lean Six Sigma in way
that is relevant and applicable to them, such as continuing to make tweaks to task to make it
easier and less time consuming to do. Also, feedback and input from staff and team members is
very helpful to make the practice more beneficial for both parties. Improvement projects should
be a continuous team effort and really encourage participation, and especially in a nonprofit
organization where the team dynamic is so strong. Lastly, it is important to be flexible and
resourceful, nonprofits face constant variability and random factors that it is best to learn to work
with what you’ve got and be open minded to change.

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

30

Conclusion
Lean Six Sigma is a process improvement methodology that is transitioning from being a not just
a manufacturing technique but also a practice that is being developed in service based industries.
The nonprofit industry is a service based sector that can particularly benefit from the Lean Six
Sigma Methodology. Nonprofits faces numerous challenges and constant variability on a daily
basis that the need for standardization, steady process flow, and consistency is crucial. A couple
case studies in the nonprofit sector have been documented, however there continues to be a need
for further research. That is why this report serves as an addition to the existing implementation
research of LSS. I applied Leans Six Sigma tools and the DMAIC process to develop an
improvement project at the GRID Alternatives warehouse. I applied more than one tool for each
step in the DMAIC process to gather as much information as I could about the current state of
the warehouse and also came up with an implementation plan with Carlos Chairez, the
warehouse manager. We then implemented our plan and were able to verify an improvement of
4.5 minutes. We were able to reduce lead time from 8.5 minutes per task in loading/unloading
after a build to 3.5 minutes. In addition, to improving lead time we also designed a usability
study to test how legible the warehouse space was to a non-construction staff member. The
results from this study came to show that there is still a work to be done to continue to improve
the warehouse space. The study specifically highlighted items that weren’t necessarily intuitive
to find and also gave us insight on that perhaps we could also improve the Bill of Materials
spreadsheet layout as well incorporating layout maps in the warehouse for employees to
reference. The usability study was extremely important because it really helped reinforce the
philosophy of continuous improvement in Lean Six Sigma. Lastly, in the end I was able to take a
step back and reflect on the bigger picture and yes we were able to implement a Lean Six Sigma

ADAPTING LEAN SIX SIGMA FOR A NON PROFIT ORGANIZATION

31

process improvement project at the GRID Warehouse but how does that relate to incorporating
and adapting Lean Six Sigma for GRID. Adapting Lean Six Sigma to the GRID Alternatives
culture means flexibility, open communication, resourcefulness, standardization, and team effort.
Works Cited
Cheng, Chen-Yang, and Pu-Yuan Chang. Implementation of Lean Six Sigma Framework in Nonprofit
Organisations: A Case Study. Thesis. University of Tunghai, 2012. N.p.: Routledge Taylor &
Francis Group, n.d. Web.
Lassiter, Vikki C. The Role of Process Improvement in the Nonprofit Organization. Thesis. University
of Pennsylvania, 2007. N.p.: Penn Libraries Scholarly Commons, n.d. Print.
Zhang, Qun, Muhammad Irfan, Muhammad Aamir Obaid Khattak, Xiaoning Zhu, and Mahmood
Hassan. Lean Six Sigma: A Literature Review. Thesis. University of Sciences and TechnologyBeijing, China and University of Southern Queensland- Sydney, Australia, 2012. N.p.: Institute
of Interdisciplinary Business Research, n.d. Print.

