Attachable
Protective
Skate Shoe
Toecap
Tyler Huff
2016 Senior Project
Liberal Arts and Engineering Studies
Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo

Table of Contents
Introduction
Product Description
Problem Product Solves
Product Viability
Quality of Solution
Novelty
Shape Considerations
Initial Design
Adjustments
Material Considerations
Properties
Selection Process
Tested Materials
Attachment
Initial Attachment
Final Attachment
Product Testing
Testing Methodology
Results
Market Climate
Skate Shoe Companies
Customer Archetypes
Final Considerations
Cost Estimation
Final Product

Skate Shoe Toecap | LAES Senior Project | Cal Poly, SLO

2

Introduction
Product Description
An attachable, protective toecap for skateboarding shoes lengthens the short
lifetime of skate shoes. The toecap extends from the outer side of shoe toes
and stops just before hitting the laces. It follows the contours of the foxing
tape. The foxing tape is the rubber strip connecting the sole to the upper part
of shoes. The toecap is 0.4cm thick, 3.5cm wide, and 11.1cm long. It is a skinny
strip of rubber adding extra protection to areas more susceptible to wear
and tear from skateboarding. The toecap is essentially a
generic, attachable extension of skate shoe soles
to improve the lifespan of
skateboarding shoes.

“The toecap
is essentially
a generic,
attachable,
extension of
skate shoe
soles”

Black leftshoe
toecap

The toecap attaches with glue, however it will ideally attach with an adhesive
strip on the inside. The product delivers an aesthetic solution to an age-old
problem in skateboarding, and makes application easy as possible on the
user. The toecap improves the lifetime of shoes at a cheap cost. The
skateboarding community needs an inexpensive, effective solution to
protecting expensive skateboarding shoes.

Skate Shoe Toecap | LAES Senior Project | Cal Poly, SLO

3

Problem Product Solves
Virtually every s skateboarder rips his or her shoes. It is an inevitable result of
skateboarding. The problem arises from how skaters perform all their tricks.
The fundamental trick, and one that is present in all derivative tricks, is the
ollie. The ollie allows skaters to jump off the ground and bring their board
with them. When a skater ollies,
he must aggressively slide his
shoe against the griptape. When
his shoe is sliding, it is at an angle
exposing the outside canvas to
the rough surface of the griptape,
as seen in the diagram. Nearly
every time a skater does a trick,
he has to slide his exposed shoe
against the griptape. In a typical
skateboarding session, a skater
may do upwards of

Mechanics of
an Ollie

200 tricks.

Repeatedly sliding
against the griptape
causes wear and tear in
skateboarding shoes.
The wear is usually
isolated to the outside
portion of the shoes
because the motion is
fundamental to almost all
skateboarding tricks.
Shoes can wear out very
quickly for advanced
skateboarders, however they
all eventually wear out for skaters of all skill levels.
Ripped shoes

Skate Shoe Toecap | LAES Senior Project | Cal Poly, SLO

4

Product Viability
Quality of Solution
The toecap provides an elegant, simple solution to a problem continually
troubling skaters. The toecap is elegant because of its simple, aesthetically
pleasing design. It seamlessly fits the contours of shoes. The design protects
vulnerable areas only, contributing to its sleek and seamless aesthetic. The
result is a beautiful product lengthening the lifetime of skateboarding shoes.

“The toecap
seamlessly fits
contours of
skate shoes”
White rightshoe toecap

Other fixes to wear and tear lack the simple attachment method the toecap
does. A common solution is “Shoe Goo”. Shoe Goo is glue made for shoes.
Applying Shoe Goo is a messy, time-consuming process. A skater must
squeeze it out of the bottle and then push it around with his hands. After a
messy, time-consuming application, all Shoe Goo can offer is an unsightly
quick fix. Skaters tend to apply Shoe Goo several times throughout the
lifetime of a shoe, as it is just a temporary solution.

Novelty
Among other strengths, the toecap also offers novelty. Skateboarding has
never seen something like this. An attachable protective toecap catches the
skateboarder’s eye. When buying a pair of skate shoes, a skater may not

Skate Shoe Toecap | LAES Senior Project | Cal Poly, SLO

5

be inclined to buy a tube of Shoe Goo along with her purchase. She has
probably used Shoe Goo before, understands its messy, time-consuming
application, and knows Shoe Goo will not last long anyways. An attachable,
protective, toecap in the same price range as Shoe Goo will grab her
attention. She has never seen anything like this. It is novel.

Shape Considerations
Initial Design
4 5/8”

In the early brainstorming
stages, designing a toecap
following the contours of
foxing tape was the first
logical step. Pulling from the
curves of the most generic
looking skate shoes, the
diagram to the right
indicates the curves of the
left and right toecaps from
a top down view. The
curves start just before the
end of the toes and stop
after 4 3/8 inches.

“Designing a
toecap that
follows the
contours of foxing
tape was the first
logical step”

Left Shoe

Right Shoe

4 3/8”
1 1/4”

Top-down view of left
and right toecaps

Next was determining the vertical curve. The
vertical curve is the bend from the shoe sole to the
flat canvas directly on top of the skater’s foot. This curve
is harder to model because it gradually changes. The curve is
sharper near the front and more gradual at the end of the toecap. This makes
sense because feet are flat at the toes and more curved at the ankle.

Skate Shoe Toecap | LAES Senior Project | Cal Poly, SLO

6

18.25625mm

Right Shoe

Left Shoe
2.381250mm

6.35mm

12.7mm

1.5875mm

28.5700mm

20.63750mm

Front Cross Section
Determined from angle change

2.381250mm

Right Shoe

Left Shoe
6.35mm

12.7mm

1.5875mm

34.925mm

26.98750mm

Back Cross Section

The diagrams to the left
depict the difference in
curvature. The curvature
linearly changes from the
front end to the back end of
the toecap. The diagrams
also indicate the rounded
edges. They are rounded so
they will not catch on
anything.
The final consideration for
the initial design was to add
a lip on the inside. It
protrudes for the entire
length of the toecap to
utilize structural support
provided by the foxing tape.
Securely attaching the
toecap is critical. The lip
allows the toecap to rest on
the foxing tape found in
skate shoes.

Design Adjustments
After 3D printing the initial design, the toecap underwent adjustments. From
attempting to fasten the toecap to multiple shoes, it became obvious the
front needed to curve more to securely latch on to the very end of shoes.
Thus, the first change was increasing the curve at the front of the toecap. The
toecap also appeared thick. The second adjustment was a slight reduction in
the thickness in an effort to make the toecap blend in more. Lastly, the
toecap looked so different and novel, engraving the name was a way to
identify it. By engraving the name, the question “What is this?” is answered
just by looking at the toecap.

`
Skate Shoe Toecap | LAES Senior Project | Cal Poly, SLO

7

Material Considerations
Properties
1. Flexible
A critical concern for the toecap is flexibility. When performing tricks, skate
shoes change shape in a quick, drastic way. A rigid material would fall off
shoes because it would not adapt to changes in the shoe. However, a flexible
material can change shape when under stress,
2. Non-deformable
In addition to a flexible toecap, it must also retain its shape when shoes
return to their normal shape. Flexibility and non-deformability are
complementary. The toecap must change shape when skaters perform tricks
and snap back to its original form once skaters complete their tricks.
3. Durable
The most important property concerning the toecap is durability. If the
toecap is not durable enough to withstand the griptape, then there is no need
for it. The toecap must be hard to not deteriorate from the griptape, but it
must also have a high coefficient of friction so skaters’ feet will not slip when
performing tricks.
4. Inexpensive
Finally, if the toecap is not cheap, skaters will not buy it. Cost is always a
factor and is no exception for this product. Skate shoes are expensive, the
toecap delivers an inexpensive solution to protecting expensive skate shoes.
If the toecap were expensive, skaters would buy new skate shoes instead.

Selection Process
The selection process involved finding materials that exhibit all the abovementioned properties. To find these materials, CES Selector, a material
selector software, compared quantifiable material properties against each
other. For each comparison, only the materials located inside the user-set
“bounding box” passed. Thus, any materials located inside all the bounding
boxes are the ones that satisfied all the restraints.

Skate Shoe Toecap | LAES Senior Project | Cal Poly, SLO

8

The graph to the right
compares Elongation versus
Flexural modulus and
includes a bounding box.
Flexural modulus is just the
tendency of a material to
bend. Elongation refers to
the amount a material can
stretch. In terms of the
toecap, the material needs
to stretch and bend a lot.
Some of the materials in the
bounding box include
thermoplastics, Polysulfide
rubber, and synthesized
rubbers.

Another important concern is
durability. The chart to the left
measures Hardness versus
Fracture Toughness. Hardness
refers to the resistance of a
material to indentation. Fracture
Toughness refers to the
resistance of a material to the
propagation of a crack. The
harder the material and less
likely it is to crack the better it
can withstand griptape. The
materials indicated in the
bounding box are the same as
the ones mentioned above.

Other properties such as price and density were compared to form a robust
restraint criterion. The materials satisfying all the properties were in some
form or another, rubbers. Besides natural rubber, elastomers passed all the
restraints.

Skate Shoe Toecap | LAES Senior Project | Cal Poly, SLO

9

Tested Materials
The two materials tested were urethane rubbers. One had a Shore 80A
hardness and the other had a Shore 60A hardness. The Shore 80A rubber
was durable, yet lacked the grip necessary for performing tricks. The Shore
60A rubber was not as hard, but did grab the griptape better. A Shore
hardness around 60-70A may be a suitable medium.

Attachment
Initial Attachment
For prototyping purposes, using Shoe
Glue to attach the toecaps seemed like
an apt solution. Skaters use it for
protecting their shoes, so they are
already familiar with it. They would just
use it to apply a toecap instead. Using a
solution (Shoe Goo) to protecting skate
shoes as a way to attach another
solution to protecting skate shoes was
redundant, but the focus was on the
design and material, not how it
attached.

Shoe Goo

During the first testing stage, Shoe Goo
did not bond to the rubber toecaps. For
productive testing, the toecap needed another simple attachment method.
Instead of Shoe Goo, Super glue worked well. Skaters testing the toecap
generally had no problems attaching the toecap and subsequently were able
to judge the toecap based on its shape and material.
Although Super glue was an effective solution to attaching the toecaps, the
problem with Super glue is that it makes the toecap a two-product solution.
Skaters are familiar with using glue to protect their shoes. Using glue, which
does protect skate shoes, to attach a toecap that protects their shoes is

Skate Shoe Toecap | LAES Senior Project | Cal Poly, SLO

10

again, redundant. Even if the toecap does a better job of protecting shoes,
using glue to attach it in sense defeats the purpose of the toecap.

Two
Product
Solution
Ideal Attachment
Double-sided adhesive tape covering the inside portion of the toecap would
make for the simplest and most effective attachment method. All the
consumer would have to do is peel off the liner, then press the inside
adhesive onto the vulnerable area of their shoes. Designing the adhesive into
the toecap makes the method for attachment self-contained. It turns the
toecap into a one-product solution.

Product Testing
Testing Methodology
To assess toecap viability, twelve skaters tested out toecaps over the span of
about two weeks. They picked a toecap from a small sample, attached it
using Super glue, and received a survey to complete after skating 1-2 weeks.
Once each skater had an impression of the product, he or she completed a
general survey. The survey asked for general impressions of the product, how
it affected their ability, how well it protected their shoes, and what they
thought about the attachment method.

Results
The surveys indicated largely positive results. In the free response section,
one participant said the toecap is “a great idea for the skate industry”.
Another participant exclaimed, “Overall I was very impressed with how well it
performed and held up against the griptape”.
Skate Shoe Toecap | LAES Senior Project | Cal Poly, SLO

11

Attachment method
None of the twelve skaters said attaching the toecap was difficult. Eleven said
it was easy to attach and one skater was neutral. However, in the free
response section, five participants indicated they would prefer adhesive tape
to Super glue. One skater succinctly answered, “would be faster and easier to
attach and replace”. Although the sample size is small, skaters are
comfortable using glue, so they may not consider how much easier using
adhesive tape could be.

Performance/Ability Impact
As indicated in the chart to the
right, ten of twelve participants
were neutral or said the toecap
positively affected their ability. A
positive affect on ability was an
unforeseen benefit to the toecap.
Three participants tested the
harder rubber (Shore 80A
hardness) toecaps. Two of those
three participants said the toecap
had a negative impact on ability.
These participants probably thought
the toecap made sliding their feet
against the griptape too slippery
because the toecap’s hardness
made the coefficient of friction
lower than what they are used too.

How did the toecap affect
ability/performance?

6	

5	

5	

4	

4	
3	
2	

2	
1	

1	
0	

0	
1	
Negative

2	

3	
Neutral

4	

5	
Positive

Protection

“No one indicated

Those surveyed thought the toecap did an excellent
the toecap did
job of protecting their shoes. One participant said
poorly protecting
the toecap did a good job and eleven said the
toecap did a great job protecting vulnerable areas.
their shoes”
No one indicated the toecap did poorly protecting
their shoes. When asked if the toecap was a better
alternative to other techniques for protecting skate shoes,
every participant exclaimed it was a better alternative. Half of the
participants said the toecap was a great alternative to other solutions.

Skate Shoe Toecap | LAES Senior Project | Cal Poly, SLO

12

Market Climate
Skate Shoe Companies
With non-traditional skate shoe
companies entering the
skateboarding industry, profits
greatly outweigh skateboarder’s
interests. Corporations such as
Nike SB are not interested in
making a durable shoe because a
durable shoe limits profit. They are
content with the status quo and skateboarders do not demand a better shoe.
Shoe companies sometimes advertise shoes as durable, but in most cases,
they are not.

Customer Archetypes
Lifer
The lifer is the most important customer archetype. This person could be in
his early teens or 30s. What matters, is that they are committed to
skateboarding. This person cannot imagine themselves without
skateboarding, and do not know what they would be doing with out it. They
understand holes in shoes will happen and have tried multiple ways to fix the
problem. They view any real solution to protecting skate shoes as a valuable
fix to a problem robbing them of countless dollars. They will gladly spend
money on a toecap if it makes their shoes last longer, and will buy successive
toecaps for their shoes. Since they are likely to buy multiple
toecaps throughout their skating careers, they are the
“Lifers will gladly
most important customer archetype.

Teenage Skater

spend money on a
toecap if it makes
their shoes last
longer”

The teenage skater is the second most important
customer archetype. His mean age is 15 years old. He
identifies as a skater, hangs out with skaters, and skates
with his friends most days after school. He enjoys skateboarding, put in

Skate Shoe Toecap | LAES Senior Project | Cal Poly, SLO

13

the effort to learn how to skateboard, and understands the problem of
wearing down skate shoes. His Mom is often annoyed at how quickly he ruins
his shoes. Sometimes he will use Shoe Goo to prevent his shoes from ripping
and sometimes he will not. He has not critically thought about how much
money he loses from ripping his shoes, but hates when they rip. This person
will buy a toecap because he sees the value in it and views it as something
cool and novel. His Mom is happy to buy him something that will protect his
expensive shoes.
There are more teenage skaters than lifers, however all lifers were once
teenager skaters. The importance and value in the teenage skater is that he
may turn into a lifetime customer if he turns into a lifetime skateboarder.

Mom
The last customer archetype, but still important is the Mom of a skater. This
skater is younger, in his preteen to early teen years. He does not yet fully
shop for himself. The Mom tends to buy his clothes and shoes, or at least have
the final say in what her son wears. Her kid is similar to the teenager skater,
but younger. This Mom is also involved in her son’s interests. She supports
skateboarding, but also realizes how costly her son’s shoes are. Whether her
son shows her a toecap, or she comes across one on her own, she sees the
value of the toecap in protecting her son’s skate shoes. She will buy a toecap
for her son without considering her son’s opinion. The prospect of saving
money overpowers her son’s opinions and she usually has the final say on
what her son wears.
An important distinction between the teenager skater using his Mom’s money
to buy a toecap and the Mom buying her son a toecap is that in the Mom
customer archetype buys her son a toecap without consulting her son.

Final Considerations
Cost Estimation
The survey asked participants what they would pay for a toecap. Their
answers were insightful. First, they would not want to buy a pair right and left
shoe toecaps. This is because skaters tend to stand one way on their boards,
called a stance. A skater has either a “regular” or “goofy” stance, according to
what feels natural to them. Since they tend to stand one way, only one of
Skate Shoe Toecap | LAES Senior Project | Cal Poly, SLO

14

their shoes wears out. Buying a toecap for both shoes would be unnecessary.
Participants also indicated they would rather buy a pack of toecaps as
opposed to just one. Participant’s answers to how much they would pay for
one toecap ranged from $2.50 to $20. The mean however, was $7.50 for one
toecap. For a pack of two toecaps, a realistic price point is $14. In terms of
profitability, this is a satisfactory price point as a prototyping company, Proto
Labs, quoted them at $3.50 each to manufacture.

Final Product
The final product will include a succinctly packaged set of two left-shoe or
right-shoe toecaps in black or white with instructions for application. There
are no sizes, and no extra baggage. The only extra item up for consideration
is adding a sticker inside, since stickers are a tradition in skateboarding
products. A skater will easily understand what the product is by the simple
and readable packaging. The potential consumer will notice the novelty,
confidence, and service the toecap offers from the packaging and product
aesthetic.

Skate Shoe Toecap | LAES Senior Project | Cal Poly, SLO

15

