Getting LA to Net Positive Competition for Innovation in Design
Senior Project Report
By: Alexander Lohr

Introduction
For my senior project I participated in the Getting LA to Net Positive Competition for Innovation in
Design competition which is part of the living building challenge. The Living Building Challenge™ is a
building certification program, advocacy tool and philosophy that define advanced measure of
sustainability in the building environment1. The Challenge is comprised of seven performance categories
called Petals: Place, Water, Energy, Health & Happiness, Materials, Equity and Beauty. Petals are
subdivided into a total of twenty Imperatives, each of which focuses on a specific sphere of influence2.
The competition is run by the Living Building Challenge Collaborative: Los Angeles.
For the competition the class ARCH 351 has decided to do a redesign of the Olympic Village. Los Angeles
will host the summer games in 2024 and already have a plan for their Olympic Village; the ARCH 351
class hopes to accomplish an Olympic Village design that will better fit LA for the future as opposed to
the current design which they feel only reflects the whims of the moment. I partnered with an
architectural student named Sergio Sanchez and acted as his structural advisor for the project. For this
project I researched green roof systems, offered structural input on the design of the structure, and
created structural drawings with the structural calculations to support them.
Goals
I worked closely with Sergio Sanchez, an architecture student, to help him design a structurally sound
building for the competition. My input was given to help shape his design and I designed the structural
system around his evolving design. The project was submitted as a poster3 that uses visuals to describe
how the project achieves the living Building Challenge guidelines for the competition.
My partner and I designed an alternative Olympic Village transportation center for the summer games
of 2024 that will be hosted in Los Angeles. The rest of the Olympic Village will be designed by the other
architects in Sergio’s class but while the remainder of the class designed the residential, amphitheater,
and recreation center I am designing the transit center with Sergio because of the unique structural
challenges that his design creates by having a slanted green roof incorporated into the design.
The rules for the project were that the building had to be between 30,000 and 50,000 SF (our building is
43,800 SF), the project must meet the needs of the Olympic Village in the short term and the needs of
the city Los Angeles in the long-term, and the project must align with the students master plan that the
entire class came up with to address the living Building Challenge. This master plan includes solar panels
for the roofs, a sloped site to collect water during storms [Figure 1], use of sustainable materials, and
encouraging walkability through numerous walkways while limiting cars. The transit center building I
worked on houses the standard ticket booth, restrooms, and info booth you would expect in the main
transportation hub of the Olympic Village as well as a bike shop and Olympic exhibits to better fit the
needs of the Olympic village and the master plan. The bike shop and the exhibits will benefit the
Olympic Village in the short run and the community in the long run by helping to promote walkability (or
bikeability in this case) during and after the Olympic games and the exhibits can function as art gallery’s
after the games.

1

Appendix A: 2015 LBC LA Competition Guidelines
Appendix B: Master Plan
3
Appendix C: Final board
2

Figure 1: water collecting system for the village from Appendix B: Master Plan

Methodology
While Sergio designed the floor plan I helped him with structural input on his designs and researched
green roofs to find a type that would work for the structure. For the design calculations4 the focus was
for the elements of the structure that would affect the visual design of the building. The prime concerns
were the gravity and the seismic loads because this defined the beams, girders, columns and lateral
system of the building and how it will look.
Once I was given the floor plan I started with the load take off for the roof. For this we needed to decide
on the material that the structure will be made out of and the type of green roof that will be used. After
researching different types of green roof systems I presented the architect of the Optigreen system type
“Pitcher Roof type P” [Figure 2]. The picture roof type P was chosen because it was a green roof system
that does not come with a gravel strip and one that can support a slope. Because the roof already
slopes into a collection point for collecting rainwater, as per the master plan, a gravel strip is not needed
and because the roof is angled the green roof system needs to be able to support a slope.
Next the material that the structure is going to be made out of needed to be agreed upon. Timber
would have been ideal as we wanted the building to represent sustainable practices, to follow the
master plan, but the loads that a green roof imposes upon the structure made timber unrealistic so steel
was chosen because it is an efficient building material that would allow all the structural members to
remain relatively small.

4

Appendix D: Design Calculations

Figure 2: The chosen green roof detail

The shape of the structure kept evolving over the entire course of the project from a simple box design
to a more complicated angled design. The structure started off as a simple box design with a slanted
roof [Figure 3] and over the course of its development was stretched out and in the west wall was
angled [Figure 4] which meant I had to constantly update the beam design as the project evolved. This in
turn made it difficult to design. To compensate for this I used spreadsheets to quickly update the design
of the structural system to keep up with the architects changes. This allowed me to give quick feedback
on the architect’s changes and quickly identify problems I need to solve. A couple of important issues
that came up that I was able to solve this way were column placement and complications to the northsouth lateral system.

Figure 3:

Figure 4:

Because the structure is partially buried underground the east west level system can be easily supported
through hidden shear walls. The north-south system is more complicated because the architect wanted
the west facing exterior wall to be made of glass with minimal supports. Because the architect wanted a
glass exterior a compromise had to be made for the lateral system. Shear walls were out for the obvious
reason that you can’t see through one and I reasoned that moment frames would not work because the
columns and beams of the moment frame would prevent exterior from looking uniform which was
important to the architect, this left brace frames which worked for Sergio [Figure 5].

Figure 5: brace frames for the west facing glass wall

Conclusion
The unique opportunity I had with this project was that because I came on the project while the
architect was still in the early stages of the project’s design I was able to directly influence said design.
Instead of having a design handed to me, which I had to fit a structural system to, the architect and I
worked together to come up with a design that took into consideration the structural systems that held
it together. Of course neither of us got everything that we wanted but because we were always aware
of each other’s needs we knew which sacrifices need to be made for the betterment of the project as a
whole.
The importance of communication between architect and engineer is of major importance. Sergio and I
would meet at least once a week in person and throughout the week with text messages to make sure
we’re both on task. We were also connected to the file sharing program Drop Box which was our
primary method of transferring files back and forth between each other. This allowed us to always be
up to date with what each other were doing. What the architect trying to accomplish and what the
engineer’s needs are has to be understood by both the architect and engineer. Both of our needs are
reflected on each other’s design, which is especially evident in how I laid out the columns affected
Sergio’s room placement and how Sergio’s room placement affected how I was able to place the
columns. How the architect design affects the structural system and vice versa, if not understood by
both parties, could lead to misunderstandings and conflict. Therefore the ability to be flexible and adapt

to changing needs of the architect is the most important skill I learned during this collaboration. The use
of spreadsheets to quickly update design of structural systems to keep up with architect’s changes
allowed me to give quick feedback on his design changes.

Appendix

Appendix A: 2015 LBC LA Competition Guidelines
Appendix B: Master Plan
Appendix C: Final board
Appendix D: Design Calculations
Appendix E: Senior Project Presentation

Getting LA to Net Positive
Competition for Innovation in Design

“A Visionary Path to a Regenerative Future”
“The Living Building Challenge . . . defines the most advanced measure of
sustainability in the built environment possible today and acts to rapidly diminish
the gap between current limits and the end-game positive solution we seek.”
“Imagine a building designed and constructed to function as elegantly and
efficiently as a flower: a building informed by its bioregion’s characteristics, and
that generates all of its own energy with renewable resources, captures and
treats all of its water, and operates efficiently and for maximum beauty.”
Competition Guidelines
Using one of the provided innovation categories, students are invited to develop a
presentation poster using compelling visualizations to describe how their projects can
achieve and transcend the Living Building Challenge.
The poster should include graphics, text and explanatory information such that the
topic is self-evident without the student’s verbal assistance. The poster title, along with
the category, students’ names, degree program, and advisor/professor name should
appear on the upper section of the board. A text description of the project no longer
than 300 words should also be included on the poster.
Registration Closes:

October 16, 2015

Poster Submissions Due:

December 21, 2015

Presentation & Awards:

January 11, 2016

Instructions for Submitting Posters:
1. All materials should be submitted via email to: lbclacollaborative@gmail.com
2. Posters should be 30” x 40” in a portrait orientation submitted as a PDF file less
than 10mb
3. You should receive a confirmation email following your submittal
4. You cannot edit your submission once submitted

2015 LBC-LA Student Competition

Accepted Posters:
Authors of accepted posters will be notified by 20 December 2015. Finalist shall be
responsible for printing, mounting, and transporting their 30” x 40” posters on vertically
formatted foam core to the final presentation. Teams will have the opportunity to
present their poster and answer questions from a distinguished panel of jurors on 11
January 2016 at Gensler Los Angeles, 500 S. Figueroa St. Los Angeles, CA 90071 from
6pm to 8pm.

Eligibility
Contestants must be enrolled at a college or university and be able to attend the final
presentations in Downtown Los Angeles on 11 January 2016. The competition is not
limited to architecture but studies in agriculture, business administration, real estate
development, urban planning, building science, material science, engineering, product
design, public policy, historic preservation, environmental studies and more. Integrated
teams are encouraged. Teams must be at least two (2) and no more than five (5)
students and one (1) advisor / professor.

Living Building Challenge – Los Angeles Collaborative

Page 2 of 5

2015 LBC-LA Student Competition

Design Innovation
Submissions must meet the requirements of all seven (7) Petals and applicable Imperatives
outlined in the Living Building Challenge version 3.0 to create an architectural proposition within
one mile of a Los Angeles Metro Rail Line. The Metro Line must be existing or currently under
construction. Use a holistic and innovative approach to net-positive design that explores a
paradigm shift within one of the typologies listed below.

Teams must identify one typology that aligns with the project to determine which Imperatives
apply:

Renovation: This typology is for any project that does not form the substantial portion of a
complete building reconstruction. Sample projects include single-floor tenant improvements,
residential kitchen remodels or historic rehabilitations of a portion of a building.

Landscape or Infrastructure (non-conditioned development): This typology is for any project
that does not include a physical structure as part of its primary program, although open-air
‘park-like’ structures, restrooms, amphitheaters and the like do fall into this category. Projects
may be as diverse as roads, bridges, plazas, sports facilities or trails.

Building: This typology is for any project that encompasses the construction of a roofed and
walled structure created for permanent use – either new or existing.

Neighborhood: This typology is for any project that contains multiple buildings in a continuous
campus, neighborhood, district or village. Sample projects include university, college or
corporate campuses; residential streets; business or industrial districts; or small villages and towns.
Every project must select a Living Transect category from the following options:

L4. General Urban Zone: This is comprised of light- to medium-density mixed-use development
found in larger villages, small towns or at the edge of larger cities. (FAR of 0.5 – 1.49)

L5. Urban Center Zone: This is comprised of a medium- to high-density mixed-use development
found in small to mid-sized cities or in the first ‘ring’ of a larger city. (FAR of 1.5 – 2.99)

L6. Urban Core Zone: This is comprised of high-to very high-density mixed use development
found in large cities and metropolises. (FAR. ≥ 3.0)

Other requirements include:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Mandatory public transit tie-in.
Link neighborhoods together using new or existing transportation systems (address
car problem).
Link economic centers and create a destination for future economic growth.
Perform a climate and place analysis, site specific.
Address natural resource availability in Southern California.
Project must be within 1 mile of a new or currently under construction Los Angeles
Metro Rail Line.

Living Building Challenge – Los Angeles Collaborative

Page 3 of 5

2015 LBC-LA Student Competition

Living Building Challenge – Los Angeles Collaborative

Page 4 of 5

2015 LBC-LA Student Competition

Prizes
1st: $2,500
2nd: $1,000
3rd: $500
4th: $500
5th: $500

Jury
The Innovation Awards are judged by an esteemed panel of key professionals from top
architectural, engineering, institutional, analytical backgrounds and select members of the
collaborative team. The judges’ identities are held in confidence until the awards are presented
to avoid any potential influence that may occur prior to the selection of the winners.

Criteria:
Innovative/Creative: 20%
Adhering to LBC Imperatives: 30%
Viability/Practicality of Concept: 30%
Collaboration: 20%

Registration:
Register at: www.eventbrite.com/e/getting-la-to-net-positive-tickets-18636501277
Then email the following to lbclacollaborative@gmail.com:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Full Institution Name
Team Name
Contact Information for All Team Members (name, email, & major/degree)
Team Manager
Academic Advisor (name & email)
How did you hear about us?
Payment Information ($25 Registration Fee)

Competition & LBC Resources
http://living-future.org/
http://living-future.org/lbc
http://living-future.org/cascadia

Questions
Contact Jeffrey Landreth at: jeffrey.landreth@gmail.com

Living Building Challenge – Los Angeles Collaborative

Page 5 of 5

Olympic Village Transportation Center
Sergio Sanchez | Advisor: Alexander Lohr | Arch 351 Stacey White | Fall 2015

This hub serves as a point of origin to the site, welcoming both locals and
tourists alike. Within this transportation center visitors will be introduced to a
brief history of the Olympic Games as well as a history of Los Angeles, the
host of the 2024 Olympics in their own respective exhibit wing of the project.
The main lobby space will be an introduction to the site, the synthesis of both
cultures and traditions being introduced with the rest of the master plan.

Bike Shop

Restaurant

LA Exhibit

Olympics
Exhibit

Ticket Booth

Info Booth

Bookstore
Convenience
Store

Bathrooms

Siteplan: Circulation + Program Placement

Village Exhibit

Transportation Center Siteplan

Bike Culture
Asian, Latino, African American Culture
Local Interaction

Los Angeles

Los Angeles Olympic Village

Olympics
Tourism
Revenue

Public Transit

International Cultures

Project Application

Program Layout

Exhibit + Waiting Area

Floor 1 - Waiting Area + Exhibit
Scale: 1/32” = 1’-0”

Floor 2 - Restaurant + Bike Shop
Scale: 1/32” = 1’-0”

Floor 3 - Extra Seating + Repair Shop
Scale: 1/32” = 1’-0”

Appendix D: Design Calculations
Sample Calculations for all beams between lines “D” and “E” (See Roof Framing Plan)
First determine the loads and dimensions associated with the beams in question.


Dimensions
Tributary width: 16.5 ft
Length of beam: 53.3 ft (with the roof slope taken into account)



Loads (Load takeoff located on Senior Project Calculations Spreadsheet)
Dead Load: 40 PSF
Live Load: 100 PSF
-

Live Load Reduction
Because the roof is meant to be walked on, I am using the basic uniform live load reduction
instead of the roof live load reduction (IBC 2012 1607.10.1)

Lr = reduced live load
L0 = 100 PSF
KLL = 4 (IBC 2012 T 1607.10.1)
AT = 879.23 (taking into account the slope of the roof)
Therefore Lr = 50.3 PSF
-

Distributed load: Wu
Distributed load determined using LRFD based on ASCE/SEI section 2.3
Assume self weight of the beam is 100 PLF

D = 40 PSF
Lr = 50.3
Trib. Width = 16.5 ft
Self weight = 100 PLF
Therefore Wu = 2220 PLF



Free Body Diagram for the Beam

Wu =2220 PLF

L = 53.3’
59.1K
Shear
59.1K
787.9K’
Moment



Largest Shear: 59.1K
Largest Moment: 787.9K’

Need to find the moment of inertia the beam needs to meet
- Allowable deflection (IBC 2012 T 1604.3)

Try W30X124 (AISC 2011 T3-2)
ӨMn = 1530 K’ > 788.17 K’
ӨVn = 530 K > 59.2 K
I = 5360 in4 > 5211.6 in4
Use W30X124 for all beams between lines “D” and “E”

Sample Calculations for all Girders on line “E” (See Roof Framing Plan)
First determine the loads and dimensions associated with the Girders in question.


Dimensions
Tributary width: 51 ft
Length of girder: 25 ft (with the roof slope taken into account)



Loads (Load takeoff located on Senior Project Calculations Spreadsheet)
Live Load: 100 PSF
-

Live Load Reduction
Because the roof is meant to be walked on, I am using the basic uniform live load reduction
instead of the roof live load reduction (IBC 2012 1607.10.1)

Lr = reduced live load
L0 = 100 PSF
KLL = 4 (IBC 2012 T 1607.10.1)
AT = 1499.9 (taking into account the slope of the roof)
Therefore Lr = 44.4 PSF
-

Self weight: Wself (Assume 100 PLF)
Point Load: P = 2 X 59.1 = 118.2K



Free Body Diagram for the Girder
P = 118.2 K
Wself =100 PLF (assume)

L = 33’
60.1K
Shear
60.1K
988.8K’
Moment



Largest Shear: 50.1K
Largest Moment: 501.5K’

Need to find the moment of inertia the beam needs to meet
- Allowable deflection (IBC 2012 T 1604.3)

Try W30X90 (AISC 2011 T3-2)
ӨMn = 1060 K’ > 788.17 K’
ӨVn = 374 K > 59.2 K
I = 3610 in4 > 3254 in4
Use W30X90 for all beams for line “E”

Sample Calculations for all Columns between lines “D” and “F” (See Roof Framing Plan)
First determine the loads and dimensions associated with the Columns in question.


Dimensions
Tributary Area: 990 SF
Length of Column: 32 ft (with the roof slope taken into account)



Loads (Load takeoff located on Senior Project Calculations Spreadsheet)
Dead Load: 55.43 PSF
Live Load: 100 PSF
-

Live Load Reduction
Because the roof is meant to be walked on, I am using the basic uniform live load reduction
instead of the roof live load reduction (IBC 2012 1607.10.1)

Lr = reduced live load
L0 = 100 PSF
KLL = 4 (IBC 2012 T 1607.10.1)
AT = 990 (taking into account the slope of the roof)
Therefore Lr = 48.8 PSF
-

Self weight: Wself (Assume 1600 PLF)
Point Load: Pu:

Pu = 143.2 lb


Free Body Diagram for the Column
Pu

L



Try W10X49
- Nominal compressive strength: Pn (AISC 2011 E3-1)
Pn = Ф * FCR * Ag
Ф = .9 (AISC 2011 T4-22)
R = 2.88 (AISC 2011 TT1-1)
Ag = 14.4 (AISC 2011 TT1-1)

Pn = 182.8 > 143.2
Use W10X49 for all Columns between lines “D” and “F”

Sample Calculations for Brace Frame (See Roof Framing Plan)
First find the soil information from the USGS summary report

Seismic Base Shear (ASCE 12.8-1):

CS = Seismic response coefficient (ASCE 12.8.1.1)
W = Seismic weight (ASCE 12.7.2)
Seismic response coefficient (ASCE 12.8.1.1):

SDS = 1.675 (USGS summary report)
SD1 = .877 (USGS summary report)
R = 6 (ASCE T 12.14-1)
Ie = 1 (ASCE 11.5.1)

W = 3679 K (Weight of Beams + Girders + Columns + Roof)
= 1727.5 K
Half of base shear goes to brace frame: 863.75 K
Plug into RISE:

Pu =297.8K
Fy = 46KSI
E = 29,000 KSI
Try HSS 14 X 14 X ½ (AISC 2011 T4-4)
Ф Pn = 609

297.8 OK

Roof Framing Plan

Getting LA to Net
Positive Competition
for Innovation in
Design
Senior Project
Engineer: Alexander Lohr
Architect: Sergio Sanchez

Submissions must meet the requirements of
all seven (7) Petals and applicable Imperatives
outlined in the Living Building Challenge
version 3.0 to create an architectural
proposition within one mile of a Los Angeles
Metro Rail Line. The Metro Line must be
existing or currently under construction.

Criteria:
Innovative/Creative: 20%
Adhering to LBC Imperatives: 30%
Viability/Practicality of Concept: 30%
Collaboration: 20%

Prizes
1st: $2,500
2nd: $1,000
3rd: $500
4th: $500
5th: $500

▪ Rejected by architect

First Need Load Take
Off
Needed to select type of green roof to
determine how it contributes to the
dead load.
▪ Roof slopes into ground
so we don’t need the
gravel strip

▪ Can handle a slope up to
35 degrees (Roof has an
8 degree slope)

Distributed Roof Load:
•

Green Roof

•

3” Rigid insulation

4.5 PSF

•

Fire Proof.

2 PSF

•

MEP

4 PSF

•

Ceiling – suspended w/A CT

2 PSF

•

MISC

2.5 PSF

•

Total

40 PSF

•

Roof Live Load:

25 PSF

100 PSF

The Iterations
The shape of the structure has
evolved over the entire course of the
project making it difficult to design.

Solution: Spreadsheets
▪ Use spreadsheets to quickly
update design of structural
systems to keep up with
architect’s changes. Thus
able to give quick feedback
on his design changes.
▪ Needs more columns
▪ Can’t have entire wall made
of glass

Lateral System

Architect wants Glass exterior:
Shear walls
Moment Frames
Brace Frames

Conclusion
Importance of communication between architect and engineer
• What is the Architect trying to accomplish
• What are the engineer’s needs
• How does the architect’s design affect the structural system
The ability to be flexible and adapt to the changing needs of the architect

