CREATING THE FOUNDATION FOR A STARTUP: DESIGN AND
IMPLEMENTATION OF A DATABASE SYSTEM FOR AN ELECTRICAL
BICYCLE RENTAL COMPANY

A Senior Project submitted to
the Faculty of California Polytechnic State University,
San Luis Obispo

In Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements for the Degree of
Bachelor of Science in Industrial Engineering

by
Alejandro Martinez
March 2017
1

ABSTRACT
CREATING THE FOUNDATION FOR A STARTUP: DESIGN AND
IMPLEMENTATION OF A DATABASE SYSTEM FOR AN ELECTRICAL
BICYCLE RENTAL COMPANY
Alejandro Martinez

Abstract.
BoltAbout was started by 4 Cal Poly students, and their COO is a fellow Industrial
Engineering student that I met during the first half of the senior project series class. He
presented project to me and I decided to work with him in developing this new database
for his startup company. BoltAbout’s customer base is growing and current operations
are not fit to meet the demand of a growing company. More specifically, their data
management system can’t be used by all current employees to perform essential tasks
such as rental processing, bicycle and equipment organization, and customer data
analysis. This is the origin and need for this project. The end goal was to design a
completely new database with an appropriate structure and user friendly interface that
would allow all employees to utilize it efficiently. The current and future needs of the
company were used as the main requirements for the database design, this decision would
ensure that the database is functional today but also five year down the line.
The final design meets the need for a simpler and more intuitive user friendly interface
with a main form that serves as a starting point for all functions or tasks employees might
need to perform. From this main form, a user can simply click a button to go to a form to
either register or update a customer, register new equipment, add equipment maintenance
details to the maintenance log, create, edit, or end a customer order, and view statistics
about their monthly performance. All these tasks are one click away. As a conclusion, the
design successfully meets BoltAbout’s needs for a simpler and functional data
management system. In addition, it allows for flexibility if the company wants to add a
new product line or different additional equipment models in the future with minimal to
no changes required to the database structure or design. Future recommendations would
be related to data security. Currently, to be able to fully use the database and all its
operations, the user needs to have access to all the information. As the company and the
employee base grows, this availability to information might have to be limited or address
as a potential area of improvement.

2

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This project was a collaborative effort between Alejandro Martinez, senior project
designer, and Rob Connelly, active and dedicated senior project technical advisor.

3

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
LIST OF FIGURES …………………………………………………………….…..

5

I.

Introduction ………………………………………………………………...

6

II.

Literature Review ………………………………………………………..…

8

III.

Design (or Theory)……………………………………………………….…

19

IV.

Methodology ……………………………………………………………….

26

V.

Results ………………………………………………………………….…..

27

VI.

Conclusion ………………………………………………………….………

29

REFERENCES ……………………..……………………………………….…..…..

31

4

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure

Page

FIGURE 1.1 THE PERVASIVE NATURE OF DATABASES …………………….. 8
FIGURE 1.2 TRANSFORMING RAW DATA INFOR INFORMATION ….……....

9

FIGURE 1.4 EMPLOYEE SKILLS CERTIFICATION POOR DESIGN ………….

10

FIGURE 1.5 EMPLOYEE SKILLS CERTIFICATION GOOD DESIGN …………

11

FIGURE 2.2 A RELATIONAL DIAGRAM ………………………………………..

11

FIGURE 2.3 ALTERNATIVE ENTITY RELATIONSHIP DIAGRAM …….……... 21
FIGURE 2.4 FINAL DESIGN ENTITY RELATIONSHIP DIAGRAM ………….… 22
FIGURE 2.5 FINAL ENTITY RELATIONSHIP DIAGRAM ………………………

23

FIGURE 3.1 MAIN FORM USER INTERFACE DESIGN …………………………

23

FIGURE 3.2 INVENTORY EQUIPMENT DETAILS USER INTERFACE DESIGN 24
FIGURE 3.3 NEW ORDER PLACEMENT USER INTERFACE DESIGN ………… 25
FIGURE 3.4 CUSTOMER INFO UPDATE USER INTERFACE DESIGN ………… 25

5

I. Introduction
BoltAbout is an electric bicycle rental company, founded by four Cal Poly students and
located in downtown San Luis Obispo. The problem originated due to BoltAbout’s
expanding customer base and the current operations not being fit to meet the demand of a
growing company. More specifically, there is no data management system that can be
used by all current employees to perform essential tasks such as rental processing, bicycle
and equipment organization, and customer data analysis. The idea for this project
originated from IME 312, one of Cal Poly’s Industrial Engineering (IE) course on data
management systems. Peter Kean, one of the cofounders of BoltAbout, is a current IE
senior student enrolled in the senior design course. This projected originated from him
looking for another IE student who was knowledgeable about data management systems
and could use techniques from IME 312 to design system that can solve all of the current
needs and issues the company is going through. I am attempting to design a database
management system that can tackle all the current needs mentioned above applying both,
techniques I learned from IME 312 and additional knowledge and topics I find through
my literature review. Overall, this report aims to solve or address the following
objectives:


Provide background information required to understand how database
management systems work and their applications.



Understand the current state of BoltAbout’s operations and how a database
management system would be the adequate solution for this problem.



Provide a design that allows for data security and various user-friendly
interfaces.



Design of standardized data entry process for constant up-to-date and
complete data records.



Equipment, sales, and customer related metrics that allow for data analytics to
be used in order to enhance company’s performance and development.

As part of this project, I intend to complete the following deliverables:


An extensive literature review that provides the background necessary to
understand how database management systems work along with their use and
application specifically in this scenario.

6



The design process, methodology, and documentation utilized such as
diagrams, tables, charts, etc.



Microsoft Access Database file of finalized database design.



Recommendations for optimal use, maintenance, and manipulation/adjustment
of database system.

In order to reach the desired solution, the approach to be followed starts with
brainstorming. To learn what others out in the industry have done and can be utilized as
part of the solution for this problem, I will start with a literature review on methodology
and examples of how databases have been used in different industries, companies, or
scenarios. In my solution reaching approach, brainstorming will be followed by data
gathering of the system’s current state along with current input data and desired output
information expected from the designed solution. Once these details are gathered, the
next step in my approach is to combine and organize both, the results obtained from the
literature review and the information gathered from the system’s current state to begin the
design of a suitable solution. The beginning of the design phase includes the planning of
data tables necessary, structure of tables, relationship between entities, and data entry
process. Then, moving to the design implementation phase, the approach would include
the building of form interfaces, coding and query language writing required to produced
desired outputs, and page to page system navigation to ensure that the database is user
friendly, intuitive, and fluent. Lastly, to reach our solution, we need to incorporate the
current data available into the database to test the design and ensure that it provides the
desired results. Adjustments, if any, will be made in order fix possible bugs or design
issues that might emerge. This is the approach I plan to follow in order to reach the
desired objectives.
The key tasks that are essential to the success of this solution are:


Detailed, complete, and accurate collection of initial data.



Careful design of database basic components (tables, queries, forms)



Careful design of database infrastructure (forms, data manipulation, code)

II. Background (includes Literature Review)
In order to understand the constrains in the design for this project, it is important to know
the current state of the company. BoltAbout is a young startup that began its journey last
year. As a young startup, the company is still working towards developing standard
7

operations for their specific company, market, and environment. With that in mind, there
are pros and cons about this situation. For instance, the lack of standard operations makes
it difficult to have a framework, criteria, or basis to build the design off of. On the other
hand, not having a strict design criterion to satisfy takes away possible limitations that
could prevent us from using innovative techniques and methods or certain design
structures. Not having these limitations allow us to create the best design possible.
Some of the aspects we need to consider for this design are based on desired outputs
specified by the BoltAbout, as well as required features based on current assumptions.
The design must comply to the assumption that the company will grow and data will
become an important company asset that will drive BoltAbout’s performance and
operations. This asset however could become a liability or be at risk. For that reason, an
important aspect of the design is data security. BoltAbout deals with sensitive private
information on their clients and the design must ensure that this information is secure
form potential future employees or non-employee individuals that come across the
database system. Next, we will go over general database systems background information
to provide a basic understanding of what databases are and how they function. Also, I
will provide detailed information on database security methodology, and applications.
Literature Review
The foundation of this research is based on the usefulness of databases and their potential
for assisting companies with advancing their business strategies and operations. Data is
abundant, and we as individuals generate and consume large amounts of data which can
be stored and managed using databases. Figure 1.1 below is an example provided by
Carlos Coronel and Steven Morris in their book “Database Systems: Design,
Implementation, and Management” of how much data we as individuals come across on a
daily basis.

8

The size and nature of the data varies depending on the type of system or nature of
business. For example, telecommunication companies such as AT&T store and manage
data on trillions of calls with data input rate of up to 70,000 calls per second. This is an
impressive number, but it helps us put into perspective the size of the data that we as
consumers produce on a daily basis, and the potential and power behind understanding
the trends and information that this massive amount of data has to offer. Figure 1.2 below
shows how we can go from data to useful information that businesses can utilize.

To summarize the topic of data and information importance and usefulness, there are
some key points that Coronel and Morris pointed out for us to keep in mind.
1. Data constitute the building blocks of information
2. Information is produced by analyzing data, therefore data collection is essential
for learning, development and growth
3. Information is used to reveal the meaning of data
4. Accurate, relevant and timely information is key to good decision making
5. Good decision making is key to organizational survival in a global environment
This is the value that a database system can provide for Boltabout, as the company begins
its journey in the world of business, consumers, and data.

Database Design
A current evolving problem is the typical lack of database design skills that lead to poor
performing databases management systems. Let’s first define database design as the
activity of designing the database structure that will store and manage the end-user data.
Different users require different data to be analyzed to produce information relevant to
their business. In order to produce the required information requested by the user, the
way in which the data is stored and analyzed has to be properly designed in order to
9

process and output the desired information. The following example helps us understand
how design of database structure is crucial for appropriate database performance. Let’s
look at Figure 1.4 where all the data was compiled and mixed together.

The issues with this approach are the following:
1. It would be difficult, if not impossible, to alphabetical listings of employees based
on their name
2. In order to determine how many employees are certified in Basic Database
Manipulation, multiple variables would need to be created by programs and then
added together.
3. You run the risk of misspelling employee names or skills creating redundancy and
inaccurate records.
4. The structure of the database would have to change if a forth skill needs to be
added, and again every time a new skill is added.
On the other side, let’s turn our attention to Figure 1.5 where the relational database
model is used.

10

The entity-relationship model finds its strength in simplicity. Figure 2.2 below
graphically explains how this model works.
The relational diagram is a graphical
representation of a relational
database’s entities such as AGENT
and CUSTOMER, the attributes
within each entity, and the
connection between entities. Notice
that the connection between entities
that is key to the relational model is
thanks to the overlap or commonality
of an attribute between the two
entities. The relationship between agents and customers is possible thanks to the
AGENT_CODE, an attribute that is unique to the AGENT, but also part of CUSTOMER.
This way we have the capability of analyzing the any possible correlations between
agents and customers. For example, what type of insurance do customers have based on
the agent’s state or zip code. This information can potentially help the company better
assign agents to customers based on the agents’ location.
11

Another concept required for the correct implementation of a relational database model is
relational algebra and how query language is used to process data. As explained in the
book “The Structure of the Relational Database Model”, relational algebra is the initial
tool presented to express queries in a relational database. Relational algebra is a set of
operations carried out by a query resulting in an answer. For instance, using query
language we can make a query that uses the relational algebra “sum” and adds all of the
customers assigned to “agent A” this year, then divide by 12 and result in the average
number of customers assigned to “agent A” per month. In general, we create queries
using relational algebra to process data and produced answers to our business questions.
Using the concepts of relational database models, relational algebra, query language, as
well as other concepts I learned through Cal Poly’s data management course as my
design foundation, I will have a solid ground on which to build a strong, useful, and high
performing database system for BoltAbout that will help them adapt, develop, and reach
their business goals.
Task-role-base access control model in smart healthcare system
One aspect of the database design to consider is security and access control to sensitive
data. There are different models to Access control (AC), such as Mandatory AC (MAC),
Discretionary AC (DAC), and Role-based AC (RBAC). Professor Ravi S. Sandhu, has
provided many articles describing Role-based Access Controls as well as their
functionality and implementation. Professor Sandhu is an expert in the field of database
and information cyber security. He teaches at the University of Texas at San Antonio and
has published dozens of articles that have been cited thousands of times on Google
Scholar. In addition, he holds many patents on cyber security systems and methods. The
information he provides on access controls, specifically RBAC, is well defined, useful,
extremely valuable, and a key component I would like to incorporate into the design of
this database.
For DAC models, access for each subject in the system is specific, and all the subjects
and objects are enumerated. Examples of subjects can be users, groups, or processes that
act on behalf of other subjects. Role-based AC (RBAC) models are gaining popularity
thanks to the several well-recognized advantages this model provides. Considering how
roles represent organizational responsibilities and functions, a role-based model supports
arbitrary, organization specific security policies. Another advantage is the simplification
of security administration to organize access privileges. In simple terms, it is easier to say
or determine who gets access to what data using RBAC. A clear example of how this
access control methodology is used is presented in the article Role-Based Access Control
Models, where the authors provides the following example. An operator role could access
all resources but not change access permissions, a security-officer role could change
12

permissions but have no access to resources, and an auditor role could access audit trails.
This administrative use of roles is also found in modern network operating system
(Sandhu, pg. 2).
This does not mean that roles and permissions are strictly exclusive, in reality, well
designed RBAC can allow for interactions between roles, permissions, and
responsibilities. As claimed by the authors, these role-role relations can be used to
enforce security policies that include separation of duties and delegation of authority
(Sandhu, pg. 2). The authors of “Role-Based Access Control Models” provides us with
Definition 1 below, which serves as a model or set of requirements that provide guidance
for the design of a role-based access control model.

As a start-up, BoltAbout might not encounter this issue just yet since all four current
members need to be fully involved with all of the company’s operations, however it is
essential to think ahead of time and design under the assumption that the company will
grow. With growth, data becomes a stronger driver for improving the business, it
becomes a handy tool, but also a valuable asset that needs to be secured.
Role-Based Access Control Features in Commercial Database Management Systems
As mentioned previously, one aspect to consider is expandability, and how the database
security and access granting authority will be designed. The reason why expandability is
important is that as mentioned currently BoltAbout has only four employees who are very
involved with all the operations and they all need open access to all available information
whether it is for operational purposes, marketing, or data analysis. However, we need to
contemplate the possibility that as the company grows, more employees will be hired to
most likely performed clerical tasks such as completing purchases and registering new
clients, which means these new employees will need to access the database which also
13

contains valuable and private information. With this in mind, I hope Microsoft Access
allows for a design that uses a role and permission granting system. Chandramouli
Ramaswamy and Ravi Sandhu present an interesting methodology used by commercial
database packages in which roles can be assigned to one or more people, and it has to be
assigned by the “System Security Officer.” The article by Ramaswamy and Sandhu
discuss many of the functionalities these commercial packages are capable of, however
we are restricted to Microsoft Access capabilities, and we are mainly interested in
borrowing the concept of having a System Security Officer that can grant roles and
permissions without providing the options for users to propagate the given role and
permission to other users. The design must allow for an interface where the System
Security Officer can perform this tasks.
Data mining security and privacy
Data mining is the process by which database users utilize data collected in the database
to discover information we didn’t expect to find. This could create a security or privacy
issue, having important information we did not intend to have. Data mining is a powerful
tool that provides lots of business benefits by analyzing corporate data which can be used
to improve efficiency. Another advantage of this technology is information sharing
throughout an organization or publicly. The article “Security and Privacy Implications of
Data Mining” mentions the sharing of corporate telephone books to the public, and how
this can decrease the need for telephone operators by offloading this task to whoever is
calling. On the other hand, when we combined these two advantages, a potential
disadvantage is created. Clifton and Marks use the example of a supplier, Dedtrees, who
gets access to and mines a retail store’s database to then alter their consumers’ tendencies
through coupon advertising. Customers’ purchases changed and affected competition
between products and as a result supplier relations and deals. Some solutions are
proposed and these can be directly related and used for the design of my database tables
and data accessibility to ensure only certain data can be access, seen, or analyzed.
Methods to secure databases against vulnerabilities
The main component of a relational database is a table. Tables represent entities that are
part of the system. For example, in a company there are employees, departments, clients,
and other entities that are modelled by a table in the database system. Taking employees
as an example for an entity, the columns of the table would describe common attributes
that all employees share, such as name, address, and salary. Tables can have as many
attributes as needed or allowed by the system, but the key characteristic of the entity is
that all employees share the same attributes. One of the attributes is chosen as the primary
key, and this attribute must be unique for each employee so that it can uniquely identify
and serve as reference for that employee. In this example, the primary key may be the
14

employee’s identification number. What makes relational database systems unique and
broadly accepted is how this model allows for entities to have relationships with each
other. For example, a department, which is one entity, can work with many different
employees, which is another entity. Those employees can work with many different
clients, which is yet another entity. We can also have a more romantic and closer one to
one relationship such as employee to cubicle, which could be another entity. In the
previous example, you can also see how these relationships can be of two types, one to
many (one department to many employees), many to many (many employees to many
clients), or one to one (one employee to one cubicle). These relationships may also be
represented by tables, and again each column would represent an attribute that all
relationships have in common. Therefore, in this database model, all data is very
structured. We need to note that these relationship cardinalities as well as other additional
rules governing these relationships are what the database management system uses to
enforce consistency within the database.
The reason why consistency is so important is that it is a key component of ACID
(Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation, and Durability). Relational Database Management
Systems (RDBMS) provide ACID to those who choose to use this model. Let’s go more
in depth into what each one of these attributes represent so we can have a better
understanding of the qualities RDBMS can provide for us. As defined by Jonathan P.
Sloan in his Master’s thesis: Atomicity means that a RDBMS will complete all elements
of a transaction or will complete no elements of the transaction in the event of an error
(Sloan, pg. 6). In this case, the RDBMS will try again to complete the entire transaction.
Consistency means that a RDBMS will ensure that after every write to the database, any
subsequent read to the database will reflect the new data and not the old data (Sloan, pg.
6). Isolation means the RDBMS will ensure that individual transactions will not interfere
with other transactions (Sloan, pg. 6). Durability means the RDBMS will ensure that any
changes to the database are persistent (Sloan, pg. 6). A write to the database will not
suddenly roll back to a previous state. Examples of RDBMS are MySQL, Microsoft
Access, and Microsoft SQL Server. I will be using Microsoft Access as the RDBMS
platform for my design, making consistency as well as the other attributes previously
mentioned a key asset of my design.
Key Success Factors for Eco-Businesses
Making a profit is the principal focus of any business. In order to make money,
companies need to constantly analyze their operations and processes to identify room for
improvement. The following are lessons that provide ideas on how to increase profit and
reduce operational costs. These can be summarized as the eight rules for increasing profit
and eight rules for reducing costs for eco-businesses but many of them are directly
applied to the bicycle rental company we are focusing on.
15

General rules for increasing profit
Servicing: This refers to selling service or functionality rather than a product. While the
product is still owned by an eco-business provider, customers pay for use or maintenance.
E-learning and videoconference substituting for transportation are examples of servicing.
Timesharing: By encouraging users to abandon individual ownership, more intensive
utilization of products can be realized. This can reduce users’ procurement costs and risks
for disposal of products. Leasing and rental schemes are examples of this rule.
General rules for reducing costs
Management of life cycles: Proper management and control of product life cycles can
reduce costs. This can be directly implemented into the design of the database by
recording data on the date products were received, maintenance done on bicycles, and
resell dates. This inputs can help BoltAbout keep track of all products’ life cycles, and
total return on investment as well as potential resell salvage value.
Utilization of knowledge and information: High utilization and sharing of knowledge and
information of business processes can increase efficiency of material/product usage,
labor, and capacity of facilities. This is another rule that suggests the implementation of a
database as a mean for cost reduction through the usage and management of data.
Components of a bicycle rental company
Another part of this research is to identify the components of a bicycle rental company.
Bicycle -sharing systems are typically share the following components:






Shared bicycles need to be easy to use, adaptable to users of different sizes,
mechanically reliable, resistant to vandalism or theft and distinctive in
appearance. The exceptional high quality electrical bicycles offered by BoltAbout
meet this component.
Most bicycle -sharing systems are equipped with bicycles that weigh between
16kg to 22kg and are heavier than typical personal bicycles. They are sturdy and
designed to be used between 10 and 15 times a day in all weathers.
Most bicycles come equipped with a Global Position System (GPS) unit, a Radio
Frequency Identification (RFID) tag, or other type of tracking mechanism. This
function is typically used in fleet management and retrieval of lost or stolen
bicycles. The benefit of having a database management system for this component
is the potential implementation of anti-theft GPS tracking methods at BoltAbout.
In addition, to make them unattractive to potential thieves, they are made in such
a way that special tools are required to disassemble them and their components

16

are incompatible with other bicycles. BoltAbout bicycles do meet this component
as they have special keys and special equipment needed to recharge them.
Conceptual Knowledge Discovery in Databases Using Formal Concept Analysis
Methods
In this publication, the author introduces the concept of Knowledge Discovery in
Databases (KDD). KDD is aimed at the development of methods, techniques, and tools
that support human analysts in the process of discovering useful information and
knowledge in databases. This is as we as we have learned essential for growing
companies that want to use the available data to advance their businesses. In addition, the
author introduces the idea of human-centered KDD which refers to the constitutive
character of human interpretation for the discovery of knowledge, and stresses the
complex, interactive process of KDD as being led by human thought. An interesting point
made by the author is how an indispensable part of the discovery process is that the
analyst explores the data and sifts through the raw data to become familiar with it and to
get a feel for what the data may cover. As a designer of the database analytics and data
mining processes, I must pay close attention to the data and the potential ground it could
cover.
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery: Making Sense out of Data
Databases provide the necessary infrastructure to store, access, and manipulate the raw
data. Databases provide a structure that helps break down the analysis for and easily
digest the details of how the data is stored and retrieved.
An emerging area in databases is data warehousing. Data warehousing primarily involves
storage, data selection, data cleaning, and infrastructure for updating databases after new
knowledge or representations are developed. Once the clean and processed data is
appropriately warehoused, we can get ready to utilize it and that’s were statistics come in.
Statistics plays an important role primarily in data selection and sampling, data mining,
and evaluation of extracted knowledge steps.
Current Solutions to Tracking Systems
A big part of the bicycle rental business model is being able to provide security for the
company’s equipment specially the bicycles currently rented out by customers. Part of
my research is to find what has been done to address this topic. The use of databases and
tracking systems go hand in hand and the following are some examples of patented
tracking systems.

17



Bicycle theft monitoring and recovery devices
o Pub. No.: US 2013/0150028 A1
o Pub. Date: Jun. 13, 2013
o Bicycle theft monitoring and recovery systems include a tracking device
with geolocation capabilities that is mount able to or integrated into a
bicycle or other assets.

Current solution to marketing support database management method, system and
program product
This invention relates to database management and usage. There is a special focus on
collecting, analyzing, and presenting data by extracting input data from an input database.
The inventor explains that as enterprises grow larger, and more complex, their supply and
buying needs, as a customer, grow even more complex. This situation is similar to what
BoltAbout is currently going through with their expanding customer base. An example
provided is how a representative servicing one line at a given customer may have need
for information about other lines sold to that customer, or about similar lines sold to a
different customer.
Furthermore, the inventor address the need that exists for rapid collection, analysis, and
presentation of mission critical data located across several enterprise-wide databases. In
addition, there exists a need for rapid extraction of input data from one or more input
databases, especially with transformation into a suitable schema, that is, suitably
specialized, tailored, and engineered schema, for subsequent analysis. This means that a
schema especially engineered to fit BoltAbout needs must be designed. A further need
exists beyond analysis of the extracted and transformed data, for presentation of the
analyzed, transformed, extracted data in a useful and understandable manner. This final
point can be met by utilizing statistics, graphs, and charts that can clearly express what
the data gathered is telling us.

18

III. Design (or Theory)
This project includes the development of a Microsoft Access database system. There will not be
any other interface or website used as part of the development other than the MS Access file.
The MS Access database will store and keep track of the following data required by BoltAbout.
Customers
 Name
 Phone number
 Email
 Date of birth
 Driver’s license ID number
 Address
 Occupation
 Reference
 Rental start date
 Rental end date
 Packaged purchased ($79, $99, $129)
Bicycle Information
 ID (Label)
 Model
 Serial number (manufacturer)
 Bicycle key ID
 Date Received
Battery Information
 ID (Label)
 Model
 Date Received
Lock Information
 Serial Number (manufacturer)
 Model
 Date Received
The previously mentioned data are inputs that BoltAbout will be required to enter in order to
process their customers, and perform their inventory management tasks. This input data will
also create the output data necessary to help BoltAbout make better decisions based on their
actual data collected and utilize it to drive their business. Another requirement of this database
is functionality and user interface.
The MS Access database will have interfaces that meet at least the following requirements:
 Item search capability: this will allow BoltAbout to look up any of the items that are
registered in the tables, know their location, or what user has them if they are rented
out.
19






User search capability: this will allow for the search of a user by either user ID or user
name (first or last). The result of the search will provide basic contact information for
that user (email address and phone number). Also, the search will provide information
on the items currently checked out by this user.
Statistics page: this form will be designed to provide useful statistics that BoltAbout can
visit monthly to assess company monthly performance and drive improvement.
Registration page: this form will provide the functionality of registering new users and
recording their information into the user database table. Also, the registration form will
allow for the entry of new equipment into the database tables.

The chosen platform was Microsoft Access, the decision to use this database system was
the solid knowledge foundation, I have using this system. The course I took on database
management systems, IME 312, heavily focused on Microsoft Access as this is an easy to
use, free entry level software, that has all the capabilities needed to satisfy any possible
need of a small company. It would be ideal to utilize the skills and knowledge from my
curriculum, rather than purchasing and learning a new software package that might be
more advanced, though underused. The design for the tables will be based on relational
database techniques and normalization rules. The course, IME 312, and my literature
review research support the use of these methods as essential techniques for a strong and
successful database design. Database interface (forms) will be based on the collaboration
of both, myself as an industrial engineer considering knowledge on human factors
engineering to create an intuitive and easy to navigate interface, and BoltAbout
management who will provide input on their processes and how the database interface
should be laid out to match their processes.
The overall approach was based upon the outputs desired out of the database system, and
the assumption of growth and the need for security associated to the company’s growth.
The initial step in my design was to create the appropriate tables required to store all the
data BoltAbout needs to keep track of in addition to any other functional tables the
database requires to perform functions such as creating reports, searches, and statistics.
Figure 2.3 below shows the initial proposed ER (Entity-Relationship) diagram for the
database. This network had the potential of working appropriately for the required
functions. However, this solution was changed after analyzing potential future
complications due to having multiple tables, one for each type of equipment. An
alternative would be to have one master inventory table that includes every single piece
of equipment, bicycles, batteries, and locks. The reason this approach was initially
disregarded was that each type of equipment has unique qualities or properties that are
not shared with the other equipment types. For example, bicycles would have a bicycle
key ID which needs to be recorded whereas, locks and batteries do not have this feature.
Once the benefits of consolidating those tables into one master equipment inventory table
20

were compared versus the cost of having multiple separate tables for each equipment
type, which is to have null values for some table fields, it was concluded that the best
approach would be to change the structure of the database to a single master inventory
table. Overall, all three equipment types and potential new equipment will share most of
the inventory master table fields such as serial number, model, and date received. Also,
the fields where null values are present are not used or referenced at all which means they
will not ever affect database usage or cause any database malfunctioning.

FIGURE 2.3 ALTERNATIVE ENTITY RELATIONSHIP DIAGRAM
Also, another change that was made to the initial design of the ER diagram was the
adjustment of order tracking. Initially, the database was designed to have one orders table
where every detail of the order was going to be recorded. The issue with this approach
was that the table would be too complex and would increase the room for technical
malfunctioning. A suggestion made by this senior project’s technical advisor was to add
an orders details table and split up the complexity. The original orders form would create
unique orders that keep track of the order ID, customer associated to that order, and the
order start data. The additional order details table would hold the rest of the order’s
information such as the equipment associated to that order which will be connected to the
master inventory table. This way customers, orders, and inventory are all connected and
can be clearly managed. The previous approach would have multiple orders with similar
users each with similar inventory items. Figure 2.4 below shows the structure of the new
ER diagram after the previously discussed changes were made.
21

FIGURE 2.4 SECOND ALTERNATIVE ENTITY RELATIONSHIP DIAGRAM
This second revised ER diagram was utilized as the framework to design most of the
database forms. This alternative met all the current requirements for BoltAbout’s current
needs. However, flexibility was not considered at that point and the ability to adapt to
changes was limited and difficult as the database structure and design would require
major changes. In order to add new equipment models or a different product line that
might be purchased in the future, new tables and forms would have to be created and the
design would be heavily constrained by the current structure of the database. Knowing
this, additions were made to the ER diagram with additional tables. A table for order
packages and equipment models was added and linked to the existing ER structure by the
model ID field which can be linked to the model ID field in the master equipment
inventory table. Following this approach, new promotional packages can be added and
linked to different models allowing for customized orders. In addition, a table for models
was added and linked to the existing equipment type table allowing new product lines and
models to be seamlessly added to the current operations without the need to change or
alter the structure of the database. The final design for the database structure can be seen
on the ER diagram below shown by figure 2.5.

22

FIGURE 2.5 FINAL ENTITY RELATIONSHIP DIAGRAM
This final database structure meets not only the current needs of the company but also
considers future potential needs of expansion and change making this database functional
today and tomorrow.
The following figures show the final design of some of the different database user
interfaces used to perform the tasks required by BoltAbout.

FIGURE 3.1 MAIN FORM USER INTERFACE DESIGN
23

The main form design seen above in figure 3.1 shows what was previously described.
This form is a simpler and straight forward interface that allows user to perform all the
tasks they might need by clicking just one button. They can search and view rental and
maintance records for any piece of equipment by selecting it and clicking the “SEARCH”
button, or if they get new equipment, they can go ahead and add it to their inventory by
clicking the “NEW” button under inventory. Without the feel of a confusing and
unorganized form, customer management is conviniently located right next to inventory
management options. The options provided for customer management include
registration of new customers by clicking the “NEW” button, viewing any selected
customer’s activity by clicking the “VIEW” button, updating customers’ details and
contact information by clicking the “UPDATE” button, or placing a new order by
selecting a customer for that order and clicking the “PLACE ORDER” button.

FIGURE 3.2 INVENTORY EQUIPMENT DETAILS USER INTERFACE DESIGN
When an inventory item is selected, in this case a bicycle, and the user clicks on the
“SEARCH” button, the interface shown in figure 3.2 above is displayed. This interface
clearly shows all records associated to an inventory item organized by rental and
maintenance records with the ability to add new service entries by clicking “Add Service
Entry” or go back to the main form by clicking “BACK”.

24

FIGURE 3.3 NEW ORDER PLACEMENT USER INTERFACE DESIGN
Another example of the database user interface design is shown in figure 3.3 above. On
the left-side, we can see how this form looks when the place order button is clicked on
the main form. Then, the user can select a bicycle, a battery, and a lock based on the
different models BoltAbout has. Then a package is selected determining the monthly cost
and user privileges the customer wishes to pay for, to then click the “Complete Order”
button and finalize the order placement process as seen on the right-side in figure 3.3.

FIGURE 3.4 CUSTOMER INFO UPDATE USER INTERFACE DESIGN
25

The above form is what’s seen by the user after selecting a customer (Maicol Petrulus in
this case) and clicking the update button on the main form. All fields display the
customer’s current information. The user simply replaces the field that needs to be
updated and clicks the “UPDATE” button to finalize updating that customer’s
information.
Each button on the main form opens a different form to either display or enter the
information needed. This simply but efficient central form navigation system will
improve user efficiency and minimize erroneous and or missing information as the forms
are coded to ensure all required fields are completed before completing the task. This
database design has been successfully designed and created, now it is important to
discuss how to test and ensure the database works properly and assimilates to
BoltAbout’s current operations and data.

IV. Methods (or Experimentation)
The previous database which contains all the current available information for customers
and equipment was provided by BoltAbout. The best way to test whether the database
can be directly implemented into BoltAbout operations is to use the current data to
simulate customers coming in and registering them as you would if a normal customer
was to walk in. The same process would be followed to test the equipment registration
form.
The testing phase is only required the current information BoltAbout has, and the new
database. All testing was done electronically as the database is a Microsoft Access system
software system. In addition to the usage of BoltAbout’s current information, the
database was tested by simulating different scenarios the user can run into. An example
of such scenario includes selecting in a combo box that changes the options for another
combo box such is the case for equipment type and model options which depend on the
previous equipment type selection. Attempting to “break” the code or complete an action
incorrectly was the second phase for testing. Human error is inevitable, and solving
issues that might be caused or can potentially occur due to user error is also the
responsibility of the designer. Testing was completed once each form was tested by
completing several trials of the operations it is designed to perform and passing the
“breaking” secondary test.
Most issues that occurred and needed to be fixed occurred during the secondary test,
when attempts to break the form were successful. Some examples are as previously
mentioned, making a selecting that would later be changed and ensuring other options
would change accordingly.
26

V. Results and Discussion

The result for this project was exceeded the initial expectations. The final design for the
database has a rational flow as the ER diagram was carefully designed, reviewed, and
revised multiple times as improvements were made and issues were addressed. The final
structure is straight forward and allows for future modifications in areas where BoltAbout
might later expand. These areas include new product lines and new equipment models.
The way this was accomplished was by separating the source of equipment and models to
a single table and referencing this table from all other forms. This means that if
BoltAbout wants to add two more models for their bicycles, they can simply type them
into the “Models” tables and they will instantly and automatically be available under the
model options for any form where bicycle models are an option.
The most important customer requirements which are the customer and equipment search
capabilities are available and function as intended. These capabilities also make other
tasks easier, for example the customer search capability makes creating new orders for
existing customer quicker as the search capability allows the user to find any user faster
to then move on to creating an order by simply selecting the customer and clicking the
“Place Order” button.
Another customer requirement was the simplification of the database as most users at
BoltAbout are not familiar with Access. The result is a main form from where all
operations can be performed. The design is also intuitive and follows a sequence where
operations are likely to be performed as a series. An example of a series of operations is
registering a new customer and placing an order for that customer. Considering that this
is very likely to be case for most new customers, the user is automatically taken to the
order placement form right after registering a new customer and associates this new order
to the customer that was just registered. If this customer does not want to place an order
yet, the user can just exit out of the order placement form and go back to the main form.
This approach is intended to minimize user confusion. In addition, throughout the
database, code enforces the user to not miss or leave fields of information empty which
will ensure orders and information is complete and accurate.
BoltAbout is less than two years old as a company. Standard processes are still being
designed, which means that the criteria and requirements for the database must also be
designed or considered by the designer taking into account future needs that might
emerge. This was one of the major challenges of this project as lacking a direction and
customer input made difficult to narrow down the scope and decide what the best design
would look like.

27

Ethics Research and Impact
After consulting the NCEES, I analyzed my senior project’s potential impact considering
my responsibility to the public welfare as my upmost priority. The analysis of my senior
project’s potential ethical impacts led to two major points of focus.
First, it is important to carefully design this database considering organizational impacts.
This database will deal with sensitive data composed of users’ personal information that
relates to knowledge retention and information security. For that reason, it is key to take
information availability and security into account to ensure users’ information is properly
used and secured.
The second factor to consider is societal impacts primarily effects on local economy and
community health. The implantation of this design can directly lead to the company’s
growth. Part of the planned design for this database is the implementation of statistics
that BoltAbout can use to determine how to better target customers, and this can
potentially result in an increase in business for BoltAbout. The company’s growth would
subsequently lead to more members of our community utilizing BoltAbout services. This
translates to an increase in the local economy as well as the community’s health.
First, the community can benefit economically by saving on transportation costs. For
example, a college student leaving off campus who not only pays for gas as he commutes
daily, but also pays for parking permits, or a local business owner driving to work daily.
As mentioned, there would be health impacts for our community since there would be an
increase in users’ physical activity using this bicycles as a main form of transportation.
Economic Impact
The company, BoltAbout, does not require an economic justification for this database for
two reasons. First, currently data management is nonexistent and this is a problem that is
stopping the development of their business. As their customer base increases, equipment
can potentially get lost and/or damaged, and keeping track of the equipment and
customers who came in contact with all equipment is essential for accountability
purposes. This can potentially create cost savings for damaged and lost equipment.
Another source of monetary savings comes from optimal performance of tasks.
Employees are currently not able to perform any tasks, and can spend hours tracking
incorrectly recorded or missing information. With the implementation of this database
those hours are eliminated which represents direct cost saving for the company.
Assuming 15 hours are spent on average per week correcting and searching for
information, at a rate of $10/hour, the cost savings per week can be up to $150 USD.
Overall, the first reason is that BoltAbout needs a data management tool to run their
business regardless of the cost.
28

The second reason is related to the conclusion of the first reason. BoltAbout needs a
properly functioning database regardless of the cost. In this case, there is no cost of
implementation for my project. This database is currently operational and can be
immediately implanted at no cost. For that reason, the economic justification not only
comes from the fact that there is no cost for implementation, but all potential opportunity
for savings from damaged equipment and optimal task performance.
VI. Conclusions (or Summary and Conclusions)
The problem originated due to BoltAbout’s expanding customer base and the fact that
current operations are not fit to meet the demand of a growing company. More
specifically, there is no data management system that can be used by all current
employees to perform essential tasks such as rental processing, bicycle and equipment
organization, and customer data analysis.
What this means is that the current method used to process orders, register customers, and
manage equipment is not appropriate and does not provide the functionality required by
BoltAbout. The database cannot be operated by other employees other than the original
database creator. Orders are often not registered, there is data missing for multiple
customers and orders and data management is currently nonexistent, meaning there is no
way to search for and or connect equipment with orders and customers. This creates
plenty of room for issues such as lost equipment, erroneous order information, and lack
of accountability as records are not accurate.
The ultimate goal for this senior project was to improve the current state of operations at
BoltAbout. The most important results are listed below.
 The main customer requirements included search capabilities and overall
simplification of the database interface so that other users who are not familiar
with Access can also use the database. These requirements were considered
throughout the design and met by the final design.
 Other requirements such as enforcement of accurate information entry were
discussed between the senior project academic advisor and the designer and
implemented making this database design professional and more user friendly.
 The design allows for adaptability and addition of future equipment with minimal
to no changes needed to the forms or structure of the database.
 Economic justification analysis resulted in potential savings of up to $150 USD
per week (with given assumptions), as well as other potential sources of savings
including equipment damage accountability.
29

 Lastly, as a confirmation for the successful completion of the project. The initial
objectives listed in the introduction were addressed and met successfully.
However, due to the current state of the company and the need for information
accessibility, objectives related to data security and statistics have been discarded
and suggested as future areas of improvement for BoltAbout. Currently, data
security can’t be achieved as full access to information is required to perform
essential tasks (updating customer information, placing orders, etc.).

Through this senior project, I learned the importance of research. I had limited
knowledge of Microsoft Access, coding and appropriate form design. The end product I
was capable of producing with my initial knowledge would have not met the
requirements for BoltAbout nor this project. Learning and gathering ideas from the client,
the academic advisor, and the research assignment is a must for any senior project that
attempt to not only repeat what has been already learned in class, but take one’s academic
and professional career to the next level, one step further.

30

REFERENCES
Ramaswamy, Chandramouli, and Ravi Sandhu. "Role-based access control features in
commercial database management systems." Proc. 21st Nat’l Information Systems
Security Conf. 1998.

Sandhu, Ravi S., et al. "Role-based access control models." Computer 29.2 (1996): 3847.

Sloan, Jonathan P. Methods to secure databases against vulnerabilities. Diss. Monterey,
California: Naval Postgraduate School, 2015.

Sandhu, Ravi. "Relational database access controls." Handbook of Information Security
Management, Auerbach Publisher, Philadelphia, PA (1994): 145-160.

Sandhu, Ravi S., and Hal Feinstein. "A three tier architecture for role-based access
control." Proc. of the 17th NIST-NCSC National Computer Security Conference. 1994.

Sandhu, Ravi S., and Pierangela Samarati. "Access control: principle and practice." IEEE
communications magazine 32.9 (1994): 40-48.

Coronel, Carlos, and Steven Morris. Database systems: design, implementation, &
management. Cengage Learning, 2016.

Paredaens, Jan, et al. The structure of the relational database model. Vol. 17. Springer
Science & Business Media, 2012.

Kondoh, Shinsuke, et al. "Analysis of key success factors for eco-business through case
studies in Japan." Proceedings of 13th CIRP International conference on Life Cycle
Engineering. 2006.
31

Midgley, Peter. "Bicycle-sharing schemes: enhancing sustainable mobility in urban
areas." United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs (2011): 1-12.

Akins, Kristine, et al. "Bicycle theft monitoring and recovery devices." U.S. Patent
Application No. 13/712,831.

Fayyad, Usama, Gregory Piatetsky-Shapiro, and Padhraic Smyth. "From data mining to
knowledge discovery in databases." AI magazine 17.3 (1996): 37.

Lee, Michael, and Ashley Stirrup. "Marketing support database management method,
system and program product." U.S. Patent Application No. 09/261,773.

Stumme, Gerd, Rudolf Wille, and Uta Wille. "Conceptual knowledge discovery in
databases using formal concept analysis methods." European Symposium on Principles of
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 1998.
Fayyad, Usama M. "Data mining and knowledge discovery: Making sense out of
data." IEEE Expert: Intelligent Systems and Their Applications 11.5 (1996): 20-25.

32

