MENTORING MANAGEMENT DATABASE
by
Alexandra Cava
Samantha Kin

A Senior Project submitted
In Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements for the Degree of
Bachelor of Science in Industrial Engineering

California Polytechnic State University
San Luis Obispo

Graded by:______________ Date of Submission__________________________
Checked by:_____________ Approved by:_____________________________

Abstract
A new mentoring program is set to begin next year pairing children from Kindergarten
through 12th grade with college students as their mentors. Keeping track of the mentor
information, mentee information, pairings, stipend disbursements, interview question results,
events, and final assessments by hand would be extremely difficult, therefore, a database would
be a great asset to the program.
Creating a database in Microsoft Access allows a user to have all this information in one
convenient location, therefore, ensuring there is a good user interface is a key component to
this project. Using Perach’s “Guide to the Perplexed” as the base information for the program,
the database is modeled to include the necessary interview results and post-mentoring
assessments outlined in the guide. Furthermore, the type of program includes mentor stipends
and encourages other events to be held besides strictly one-on-one mentoring time which
needs to be kept track of well. Designing these forms and tables requires the information to be
easily recordable and accessible. After every milestone or significant revision, the database was
reviewed with the client to ensure her satisfaction since she will likely be the sole or co-user.
Ultimately, the database was a success by being straightforward, user-friendly, and
including all necessary capabilities. Naturally, there are concerns of the durability of the
database over time and Access only being designed for one user, but this can be assessed over
time and use of the database after a round of the mentoring program has been completed.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
LIST OF FIGURES ……………………………………………………………....

1

I.

Introduction ………………………………………………………………...

2

II.

Literature Review ………………………………………………………..…

3

III.

Design (or Theory)……………………………………………………….…

9

IV.

Methodology ……………………………………………………………….

21

V.

Results ………………………………………………………………….…..

21

VI.

Conclusion ………………………………………………………….………

23

REFERENCES (or BIBLIOGRAPHY)……………………………………….……

25

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure

Page

Figure 1…………………………………………………………………….……………

10

Figure 2…………………………………………………………………….……………

11

Figure 3…………………………………………………………………….……………

11

Figure 4…………………………………………………………………….……………

12

Figure 5…………………………………………………………………….……………

12

Figure 6…………………………………………………………………….……………

13

Figure 7…………………………………………………………………….……………

13

Figure 8…………………………………………………………………….……………

14

Figure 9…………………………………………………………………….……………

14

Figure 10…………………………………………………………………….…………… 15
Figure 11…………………………………………………………………….…………… 15
Figure 12…………………………………………………………………….…………… 16
Figure 13…………………………………………………………………….…………… 16
Figure 14…………………………………………………………………….…………… 17
Figure 15…………………………………………………………………….…………… 18
Figure 16…………………………………………………………………….…………… 19
Figure 17…………………………………………………………………….…………… 20
Figure 18…………………………………………………………………….…………… 20

I. Introduction
The Perach Tutorial Project is a mentoring program that originated in Israel in 1974,
pairing underprivileged children in Kindergarten to 12th grade with university students as their
mentors. The guidance that these children receive from their tutor ultimately helps them realize
their potential and increase their intrinsic motivation. The subject of this report describes how
Microsoft Access was used to design a database for management of U.S. mentoring programs
similar in structure to Perach. The target mentoring programs are that of Kindergarten to 12th
grade students that are mentored by college students in an effort to improve the children’s
current performance in school. In order to run the mentoring programs smoothly, administrators
need a way to efficiently manage and keep an accurate track of all relevant information. The
objectives of this project are to create a database that will allow the user to:
●

Input and edit all mentor and mentee information

●

Monitor stipends, survey results, events, interview responses, expenses, and mentoring
progress
Conducive to developing a user-friendly database, all knowledge and skills regarding

Microsoft Access gained in “IME 312: Data Management and System Design” was reviewed
extensively. Additional research was also done on existing mentoring programs in order to
develop a concrete understanding of all the elements needed in the final design of the
database. The primary problem solving methodology used in this project was trial and error due
to the nature of creating databases via Access. The database was constantly evaluated and
modified to fit the guidelines and goals of mentoring programs such as Perach. The remainder
of the report will thoroughly detail each milestone made in arriving to our final database design.

II. Background
Mentor management databases are used in a variety of mentoring programs. Large
national organizations, such as Big Brothers Big Sisters, would not be able to operate without a
database to keep track of their programs and the people in these programs. Software products
like American Learns supports a variety of companies and organizations that have different
needs anywhere from small community to nation-wide organizations such as AmeriCorps.
Innovative Mentoring is another company that offers a customizable software package based on
the need of the customer and boasts that their software products are based on proven tactics
for the success of mentoring programs.
Perach’s “Guide to the Perplexed” is the document that will be used to set up the
mentoring program for the Atascadero Fine Arts Academy. According to the guide, the goal for
the mentee is to establish a connection with the mentor in order to foster self-esteem, solidify
academics and achievements, and inspire the children in regards to their future. Additional
benefits for the community and general society includes more supported youth, more effective
educations, and increased happiness. Furthermore, establishing good relationships with the
school, principals, parents, and teachers as well as having interviews with key stakeholders
including the children is key for a successful foundation.
Literature Review
The literature review regarding the creation of a mentoring management database has
two significant parts. The first discusses the psychology behind youth mentoring and how it
relates to the design of the database. The second part discusses the steps in making a
database user-friendly and the importance of doing so.

Psychology of Youth Mentoring
Over the years, mentoring has increased in popularity due to the decreases in support
via family. Mentoring is a less-intensive alternative to therapy and other more serious measures,
and it provides a variety of benefits simultaneously that cannot be achieved effectively
otherwise. As mentoring programs have grown in popularity, there has been an increasingly
wide breadth of what mentorship includes. That being said, it is important to have a definition in
order to measure and lie out expectations so long-term goals can be met (Situational Mentor xvxvi).
Mentoring programs are often initiated or developed with the hopes of benefitting the
mentee, however, mentoring has proved to be a mutual relationship benefitting both the mentor
and the mentee as the two often gain valuable knowledge from one another. In today’s age of
mentoring, mentors and mentees are encouraged to establish a collaborative relationship with a
constant focus on reflection. Topics to reflect on include progress made towards a goal,
continuation of the learning process, and achievements made thus far. Along with an openness
and willingness to learn, reflection allows both partners in the relationship to inherit new skills
that they might not have acquired otherwise (Trepanier-Street, 2007).
In developing a mentoring program, the description of the program needs to be clearly
articulated and it must express the issues it wishes to solve with the relationships formed. In
addition, with a structured curriculum, any change in knowledge or skills can be seen as a
measured, positive impact (DuBois & Karcher, 2005).
Mentoring children has its advantages over mentoring an adolescent or teenager. Since
children are less likely to have already experienced any serious risks or trauma in their young
lives, mentors have a greater chance of providing a greater preventive impact than with an
adolescent. In addition, mentors can often help guide children through key transition stages in
their lives, however, the child’s lack of verbal and cognitive abilities could also inhibit them from
fully benefiting from the experience and relationship (DuBois & Karcher, 2005). As for the

mentor, working with young children results in an increased knowledge and understanding of
child development and proper developmental practices in education (Trepanier-Street, 2007).
Several studies have been conducted to investigate the best conditions for a successful
mentoring relationship. A study done in 1997 by Stein showed that longer mentoring
relationships established with adults as mentors had more positive outcomes due to the ongoing
nature of the relationship. Another study done by Grossman and Rhodes in 2002 exhibited that
mentoring lasting a year or more had more academic, psychosocial and behavioral outcomes
while relationships ending too soon concluded in a lower perceived academic competence and
lower valued self-worth for the mentee (DuBois & Karcher, 2005).
A recent mentoring program, Jumpstart, paired young children with college students. At
both the start and the end of the program, the mentors were asked to complete a survey that
questioned them on their knowledge of childhood development. The responses that were made
at the end of the program showed a significant gain in knowledge and understanding in various
areas in comparison to the responses given before the mentoring began. After working in the
Jumpstart program, more than half of college mentors indicated that the experience had helped
them academically and several expressed an interest in pursuing a career in education or their
preexisting interest was reinforced. Overall, the program demonstrated that children had a
positive impact on the college students in a personal and professional aspect. The mentors
expressed the development of leadership, communication, and teamwork skills along with an
understanding and respect for others as a result of the program (Trepanier-Street, 2007).
Surveys, like those given in the Jumpstart program, are extremely crucial in assessing
the effectiveness of a mentoring program. A software catered to carrying out the functionalities
of a mentoring program needs to be able to record any interview and survey information, along
with a place to record direct observations as well. In order to measure a mentee’s progress
accurately, the database should allow for standardized ratings to be recorded by the user from

parents, teachers, peers, mentors, and mentees. Observational coding systems could also be
another way of assessing a change in a child’s affective responses (DuBois & Karcher, 2005).
The Perach Tutorial Project incorporates several of the principles that have been found
to be most effective in child mentoring which is why the program has been known to be so
successful. It was started by Dr. Rony Attar and Amos Carmelli in Israel in 1974 and has since
spread to about 20 other countries worldwide and is the largest organization of its kind in the
world (The Perach Tutorial Project). Underprivileged children are able to grow academically and
socially through a compassionate relationship with their personal mentor; in contrast, the
university students gain a desire to work towards reducing social gaps and receive an incentive
for their time and dedication that can be put towards their college tuition (Rehovot, 2008).
Creating a User-Friendly Database
Databases are widely used throughout mentoring programs. Different companies need
different levels of database functionality. MENTOR offers a database called MentorCore with 3
target audiences: Youth, Higher Education, and Workplace mentoring. The youth and higher
education editions have four price points depending on the number of mentors and mentees in
the system. The lowest level is $75/month for 100 matches. InnovativeMentoring simply has
three tiers of their software packages based on size of the program and how many functions the
customers want access to. The lowest level has a setup fee of $200, a monthly cost of $25, and
includes some of the follow features: 1-5 users, unlimited matches, customization, mass email,
training, and support. However, this option does not include surveys like the tier two option
does. Assessing these costs and options helps narrow down features to include and what
applications to consider.
Several programs currently exist that could be used in building a database, but it should
be noted that spreadsheet programs, like Microsoft Excel, have a lot of room for potential error
due to the fact that all data must be manually tabbed through using arrow keys. In addition, only

about 20 variables can be seen at a time on a spreadsheet program which could be another
possible cause for error during scrolling or reorientation. Microsoft Access eliminates these
potential causes for error by allowing automatic tabbing from one variable to the next and
through its format design which allows all variables to be seen on the screen at the same time
(Schneider, Schneider, & Laurenz, 2005). Therefore, Microsoft Access was the database
management system application chosen due to the increased functionality compared to Excel
and the simplicity. A standalone version of Microsoft Access, not a part of a suite package as it
has typically been in the past, is valued at $109.99 according to the Microsoft website. However,
the California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo licenses the program, so there
were no costs accrued in making the database.
In creating any database, it is extremely essential that a plan is set in place that outlines
the desired functions and capabilities of the database before first diving straight into Microsoft
Access. Making a plan will save time and will help easily outline the tables and forms needed
and how each data field will need to relate. When drafting the plan, the future user of the
database should always be kept in mind, along with the tasks they will need to perform. By
doing so, the creator of the database will be able to determine just how user-friendly it needs to
be (Black & Vernetti, 2015).
There are three major components in creating a database through Microsoft Access:
tables, queries, and forms. All data in Access is stored in tables, which are formatted as
spreadsheets. Often times, each table will possess a primary key, which identifies each record
in the table by a unique value. This is important because repeating groups of data within a table
can create null values (Black & Vernetti, 2015). By setting a primary key, it will be impossible for
any duplicate data within that field to be entered into the table (Schneider, Schneider, &
Laurenz, 2005). Lastly, there are two relationships between tables: one-to-one and one-tomany. A one-to-one relationship relates two separate tables by joining the same exact field in
each one while a one-to-many relationship relates two separate tables by connecting the

primary field in one table to a field in another table that is not a primary key and therefore can
have multiple values (Black & Vernetti, 2015).
A query in Microsoft Access pulls together specific records from one or more tables and
consolidates all of them information onto a single datasheet. Queries are extremely useful
because they allow the user to view only the fields he or she is interested in analyzing within a
given table. In addition, append queries, a specific type of query, make data entry easier by
facilitating edits made to specific data tables without ever having to open the table itself (Black &
Vernetti, 2015).
Lastly, a form is used to create the user interface within Access and often has black
spaces open for entering and modifying data (Schneider, Schneider, & Laurenz, 2005). A form
is extremely essential because it allows the user to enter new information into previously
created tables (Black & Vernetti, 2005). Luckily, Microsoft Access makes it fairly simple to make
a form user-friendly by allowing automatic tabbing from field to field and record to record. In
addition, the Form Wizard allows users to format the layout so that all data fields can be placed
on the same screen and to change the background, color, or font of the form (Schneider,
Schneider, & Laurenz, 2005).

III. Design
Requirements, Specifications, & Constraints
The purpose of the database is to keep track of and easily manage a variety of data.
This includes personal information for both mentors and mentees, mentor tuberculosis test and
fingerprinting dates, pairings, meeting dates and times, stipend amounts and disbursement
information, event details, interview question responses, and end-of-program assessments.
Creating a user-friendly way of organizing and interacting with this data will allow administrators
to have a more successful mentoring program and run it more smoothly. Using the Perach’s
“Guide to the Perplexed” gives further insight as to the specific goals and methods of the
program. Using this document further assists in outlining what to include in the database and
especially the forms where data is input.
A major constraint for this project is the lack of a multi-user database. By using Access,
only one user can input or utilize the data at a time, and sharing the file would require either a
cloud drive or other method such as email or dropbox. This can be highly inconvenient if, for
example, multiple coordinators of the program wanted to access and edit the data
simultaneously in preparation for an event.
User-Interface Design
The user-interface is such an important aspect of the design because a poorly designed
user-interface will only result in confusion and frustration for the user. Therefore, for the
database to be fully functional, it must be user-friendly. The program coordinator plans on being
able to carry out several operations through the database. These operations include inputting
new mentors and mentees, pairing mentors and mentees, recording interview questions, and
recording stipends, to name a few. For this reason, it was best to incorporate a main form that
opens automatically each time the database is opened by the user. The main form has buttons

linking to each of the operations, which in turn all have their own separate form with a button
linking back to the main form. This will make it extremely useful for the user to navigate from
operation to operation. A screenshot of the main form can be seen in Figure 1.

Figure 1: Main Form
The individual forms that were included were “Add New Mentee”, “Add New Mentor”, “Add
Mentor TB & Fingerprinting”, “Pair Mentor & Mentee”, “Mentor Interview Questions”, “Record
Stipends”, “Record Events”, “Record “Activities”, “Record Incident”, “Mentor Experience
Assessment” and “Assessment of Mentee” for mentors, teachers, and parents (Figures xx - xx).

Figure 2: Add Mentee Form

Figure 3: Add Mentor Form

Figure 4: Mentor TB Test and Fingerprinting Dates Form

Figure 5: Pairing Form

Figure 6: Mentor Interview Questions Form

Figure 7: Stipend Disbursement Form

Figure 8: Events Form

Figure 9: Activity Form

Figure 10: Incident Form

Figure 11: Mentor Experience Assessment Form

Figure 12: Mentor Assessment of Mentee Form

Figure 13: Teacher Assessment of Mentee Form

Figure 14: Parent Assessment of Mentee Form
For each of the individual forms, drop-down menus and date pickers were incorporated
wherever possible to spare the user from having to type things in manually each time. In
addition, the format, background, and font of each form was made to be aesthetically-pleasing
to the user’s eye to give the user additional ease in using the database.
Database Design
After establishing a solid understanding of the client’s wants and requirements for the
database, all of the tables, queries, and their corresponding relationships were strategically
planned out with one another within Microsoft Access. Tables were quickly made to record basic
mentor and mentee information, interview questions responses, TB test and fingerprinting
dates, and a table that would hold all the pairings in the program. Tables were also made to
record stipends, events, expenses, and incidents as each of these has a corresponding form to
go along with it in the database. Figures 15 and 16 below are screenshots of the MENTORS

and STIPEND tables. The MENTORS table has 5 different fields: ID, LastName, FirstName,
PhoneNumber, and Email, with the primary key being ID. The STIPEND table has 4 different
fields: MentorName, IssueDate, IssuedAmount, and CheckNumber, with the primary key being
CheckNumber. Each mentor is given an autonumber from ID, ensuring that each ID is only used
once. CheckNumber is used as the primary key for the STIPEND table so that multiple stipends
for a particular mentor can be added but the same check number can never be duplicated.

Figure 15: MENTORS Table

Figure 16: STIPEND Table
Queries were made to create concatenated expressions of first and last names of all the
students so that their names could be found more easily in a drop-down menu within a form.
Append and update queries were also made to help add new information and edit any pre
existing information within the table so that the user does not have to enter the table and edit or
delete the record manually. See Figure 17 and 18 below.

Figure 17: Activities Append Query

Figure 18: Add Mentee Update Query

IV. Methodology
The method to designing the database was based off of the client-provided documents,
background, and information regarding the mentoring program. This mostly entailed following
Perach’s “Guide to the Perplexed” in order to describe the goals of the program and where the
database fits in with accomplishing these goals. Design and details of what to include were up
for more personal interpretation while consulting our client during the process.
Creating the database did not have a specific procedural method since databases are
custom-designed for the client and purpose. Researching how to design a good user interface
and thinking of the client’s purpose for the database were the motivations for creating the
database as it is. The database and contents were reviewed with the client at each milestone to
ensure functionality and ease of use as well as to confirm all necessary mentoring program
information can be stored.
An example of how the database was made user-friendly, practical, and functional is
adding an edit feature for adding mentors and mentees. If there is an update in information or a
misspelling, the user can easily select the entry from the subform, edit the information in the
populated text boxes, and click update.

V. Results & Discussion
The results from the final design of the database were as expected, considering that the
design was customized every step of the way with the client in mind. The methodology used to
carry out the project allowed the design to be executed perfectly. The overall design of the
database is fairly complex while still offering a simple and appealing interface; it allows the user
to easily manage data and carry out any operations that may need to be done as a coordinator
of a mentoring program.

The database created saves mentoring program coordinators a considerable amount of
time. Instead of digging through emails and notes, all the necessary information can be easily
input and recalled with the simple user interface. Given the benefits our software package has
to offer, the level of simplicity, and the minimal upkeep, the Access-based mentoring
management database created has an assessed value of $100 flat-rate cost plus a $10 monthly
fee for customer assistance and other ongoing upkeep.
Any quality expectations discussed at the beginning of the project were easy to meet
with the final design of the database as it was very clear what the client wanted. Anything not
meeting her expectations or any faulty operations in the database would have been seen as
poor quality, therefore, it was ensured that everything worked correctly. Productivity was also
consistently on track as both deadlines set by the advisor and self-created deadlines were met
as a team. The final design of the database adhered very closely to the original plans for the
design, so nothing in that section would need to be changed quite yet in regards to the results.
Though some minor issues arose during the creation of the database, no unusual
conditions were present as this was to be somewhat expected due to Microsoft Access’s
sensitive nature. In addition, no results were particularly difficult to interpret as the results are
mainly subjective observations. An issue that continues to somewhat remain unanswered is the
idea of multiple users for the database. More research would need to be conducted regarding
the implementation of a different software or an additional program that could update the file
consistently via the internet.
Though the program coordinator had no current way of recording all of the data she
needed as the mentoring program had not yet begun, it is safe to assume that the database
would save her a significant amount of time than if she were to use Microsoft Excel to manage
all of the data. However, the use of the design should be somewhat limited until the database

has been used for a full cycle of the mentoring program. After those 18 weeks, some issues
may arise where a query may not run correctly or a realization is made that some components
to the mentoring program are missing. Upon the arrival of these issues, adjustments will need to
be made accordingly and operations will need to be added or slightly modified.

VI. Conclusion
Before the start of this project, the client needed a way of efficiently managing
information for her future mentoring program. For this reason, the overall objectives were to
create a database that would allow its user to input and update all mentor and mentee
information and monitor stipends, survey results, events, interview responses, expenses, and
mentoring assessments. The primary methodology used in approaching a solution to this
problem was trial and error; countless versions of a database were created to ensure that the
final design would possess all the needs and desires of the client. As a result, the final design of
the database incorporated:
●

A simple and user-friendly interface to navigate between countless mentoring
coordinator operations

●

The ability to carry out all tasks that were addressed by the client with ease

●

Fully functioning tables capable of holding all mentoring data
The project was very successful as each objective was achieved and the program

coordinator was very pleased with the final design of the database. More importantly, she now
has a way of accurately and efficiently monitoring all of the information for her mentoring
program.
Overall, the project team learned that there is a lot of psychology behind the concept of
youth mentoring and it was very important to understand those theories and information before

proceeding with the design of the database. In addition, it was reinforced that trial and error was
a useful methodology to use in regards to reaching a solution to the problem using Microsoft
Access. Next time, the team would like to further research a way to make the database
accessible by multiple users from different computers while still accurately updating and
maintaining all of the information. Based on the findings, the team would recommend that the
database be updated after being in use for one full cycle of the mentoring program, as the
coordinator may wish to add specific operations or change any form or table layouts.

REFERENCES
Buy Microsoft Access 2016 - Microsoft Store. Microsoft Store. N.p., n.d. Web. 01 June 2016.
Black, N. H., & Vernetti, B. J. (2015). Root-cause analysis: Creating & utilizing a functional
database. Professional Safety, 60(2), 60-62. Web. 1 Mar. 2016.
DuBois, David L., and Michael J. Karcher. "Mentoring Children." Handbook of Youth Mentoring.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2005. N. pag. Print.
Dubois, David L., Nelson Portillo, Jean E. Rhodes, Naida Silverthorn, and Jeffrey C. Valentine.
"How Effective Are Mentoring Programs for Youth? A Systematic Assessment of the
Evidence." Psychological Science in the Public Interest 12.2 (2011): 57-91. Web. 2 Feb.
2016.
Garringer, Michael, and Patti MacRae. Foundations of Successful Youth Mentoring. Portland:
National Mentoring Center, 2008. Print.
MentorCore Program Management Software. MENTOR. N.p., n.d. Web. 01 June 2016.
Mentoring Software Pricing. Innovative Mentoring Software. N.p., n.d. Web. 01 June 2016.
Rehovot. Perach's Guide to the Perplexed N.p.: n.p., 2008. Print.
Situational Mentor. Abingdon, GB: Gower, 2012. ProQuest ebrary. Web. 2 February 2016.
"Six Ways to Measure Mentoring - TALENT MANAGEMENT." Talent Management. Human
Capital Media, 08 Apr. 2013. Web. 14 May 2016.
Schneider, Joanne Kraenzle, Joseph F. Schneider, and Rebecca A. Lorenz. "Creating userfriendly databases with Microsoft Access." Nurse Researcher 13.1 (2005): 57+.
Academic OneFile. Web. 1 Mar. 2016.
The Perach Tutorial Project. ‫דף הבית‬. N.p., n.d. Web. 12 March 2016.
Trepanier-Street, Mary. "Mentoring young children: impact on college students." Childhood
Education 84.1 (2007): 15+. Academic OneFile. Web. 1 Mar. 2016.
Ueno, Nachi, Ryota Hashimoto, Hisaharu Ishii, Hiroyuki Makino, and Yuzuru Kitayama. "Filterbased Access Control Model: Exploring A More Usable Database Management."
Proceedings of the 4th Symposium on Computer Human Interaction for the Management
of Information Technology - CHiMiT '10 (2010): n. pag. Web. 2 Feb. 2016.

