Bear Minimum: Ultralight Composite Bear Canister
Final Design Review
June 5, 2017
ME 430
Spring 2017

Team Members:
Rama Adajian
​radajian@calpoly.edu
Adam Eisenbarth
​aeisenba@calpoly.edu
Sponsor:
Nick Hellewell
​nick@hellewell.net
Advisor:
Dr. Peter Schuster
pschuste@calpoly.edu

Mechanical Engineering Department
California Polytechnic State University

Statement of Disclaimer
Since this project is a result of a class assignment, it has been graded and accepted as
fulfillment of the course requirements. Acceptance does not imply technical accuracy or
reliability. Any use of information in this report is done at the risk of the user. These risks may
include catastrophic failure of the device or infringement of patent or copyright laws. California
Polytechnic State University at San Luis Obispo and its staff cannot be held liable for any use or
misuse of the project.

1

Table of Contents
1 Introduction & Abstract

13

2 Background
2.1 Rules, Regulations & Codes
2.1.1 Rules
2.2 Existing Solutions for Similar Problems
2.3 Existing Products & Benchmarking
2.4 Patents
2.5 Past Technical Problems
2.6 Common Testing & Validation Procedures
2.6.1 Destructive Testing
2.6.2 Non Destructive Testing

14
14
14
15
16
21
23
24
24
24

3 Objectives
3.1 Project Goals
3.1.1 Project Goals for Current Scope
3.1.2 Project Reach Goals
3.1.3 Project Scope and Boundary Sketch
3.2 Quality Function Deployment (QFD) Process
3.2.1 Overview
3.2.2 Customer Requirements
3.2.3 Design Specifications
3.2.3.1 Compliance Discussion
3.2.3.2 Risk Discussion
3.2.4 QFD Discussion

26
26
26
26
27
27
27
27
29
30
30
30

4 Management Plan
4.1 Milestones
4.2 Gantt Chart
4.2.1 Outstanding Tasks
4.3 Team Member Roles
4.4 Safety Hazard Identification Checklist

34
34
34
35
35
36

5 Manufacturing the Previous Canister Body
5.1 Overview
5.2 Molds

38
38
38
2

5.3 Pre-Layup Procedure
5.4 Layup Procedure
5.5 Curing and Post Processing
5.6 Results and Discussion
5.6.1 Overview
5.6.2 Suggestions for Improvement
6 Design Development
6.1 Overview
6.2 Ideation Process
6.3 Concept Modeling
6.3.1 Overview
6.3.2 Core Materials
6.3.3 Corrugate Geometry
6.3.4 Opening Location
6.3.5 Attachment-Locking Mechanism
6.4 Weighted Decision Matrix Process
6.4.1 Overview
6.4.2 Core Materials
6.4.3 Corrugate Geometry
6.4.4 Opening Location
6.4.5 Attachment-Locking Mechanism
6.5 Final Selected Designs
6.5.1 Overview
6.5.2 Engineering Assessment: Top Opening Design
6.5.2.1 Overview
6.5.2.2 Geometry & CAD Modeling
6.5.2.3 Prototyping
6.5.2.4 Load Case Analysis
6.5.2.5 Material Selection
6.5.2.6 Manufacturing Process
6.5.2.7 Testing
6.5.2.8 Cost Estimate
6.5.2.9 Incomplete Concept Considerations
6.5.3 Engineering Assessment: Middle Opening Design
6.5.3.1 Overview
6.5.3.2 Geometry & CAD Modeling
6.5.3.3 Prototyping

39
39
40
41
41
41
43
43
43
44
45
45
46
47
47
48
48
48
49
49
50
51
51
51
51
52
52
53
55
55
56
56
57
58
58
58
59
3

6.5.3.4 Load Case Analysis
6.5.3.5 Material Selection
6.5.3.6 Manufacturing Process
6.5.3.7 Testing
6.5.3.8 Cost Estimate
6.5.3.9 Incomplete Concept Considerations
6.5.4 Conclusion

60
62
62
63
63
64
65

7 Final Design Details
7.1 Introduction
7.2 Design Description
7.2.1 Physical Features
7.2.1.1 Canister Body
7.2.1.2 Stiffening Ring Assembly
7.2.2 Material Selection
7.2.2.1 Canister Body
7.2.2.2 Stiffening Ring
7.2.2.3 Mold and Canister Assembly
7.2.3 Design Specific Safety Considerations
7.2.4 Maintenance and Repairs
7.2.4.1 Maintenance
7.2.4.2 Repairs
7.3 Justification
7.3.1 Analysis Results
7.3.1.1 Hand Calculation Results
7.3.1.2 FEA Analysis
7.3.1.2.1 Stiffening Ring
7.3.1.2.2 Stress Concentrations Around the Drilled Holes
7.3.2 Testing Results
7.3.3 Engineering Judgement
7.3.4 Feasibility and Possible Issues
7.4 Supporting Data
7.4.1 Bill of Materials
7.4.2 Cost Analysis
7.5 Drawings

66
66
67
67
67
67
69
69
70
71
71
72
72
72
72
72
72
75
75
76
76
81
82
84
84
85
88

8 Project Plan
8.1 Design Verification

88
88
4

8.1.1 Overview
8.1.2 Future Test Plan
8.2 Design of the Manufacturing Process
8.2.1 Half Canister Body
8.2.2 Stiffening Ring
8.2.2.1 Canister Assembly
8.2.3 Special Procedures

88
89
91
91
92
95
95

9 Manufacturing
9.1 Introduction
9.2 Canister Half
9.2.1 Mold
9.2.2 Pre-Layup Process
9.2.3 Laup Process
9.2.4 Post-Layup Process
9.3 Stiffening Ring
9.3.1 Mold
9.3.2 Pre-Layup Process
9.3.2.1 Carbon Preparation
9.3.2.2 Mold Preparation
9.3.3 Layup Process
9.3.4 Post-Layup Process
9.3.5 Manufacturing Iterations
9.3.6 Recommendations for Future Manufacturing

95
95
96
96
96
96
96
98
98
98
98
98
98
100
101
102

10 Design Verification & Testing
10.1 Instron Testing
10.1.1 Canister Half
10.1.1.1 Strength Test: 4-Layer Canister Half
10.1.1.2 Stiffness Test: 5-Hour Cure vs 12-Hour Cure
10.1.1.3 Stiffness Test: 3-Layer Canister Half vs 4-Layer Canister Half
10.1.2 Canister Assembly
10.1.2.1 Stiffness Test: 1.3 lbs Canister Assembly vs 1.7 lbs Canister Assembly
10.2 Drop Testing
10.2.1 Introduction
10.2.2 Drop Testing Plan
10.2.2.1 Introduction & Objective
10.2.2.2 Goals

103
103
103
103
104
105
106
106
107
107
108
108
108
5

10.2.2.3 Schematic:
108
10.2.2.4 Equipment and Specifications:
109
10.2.2.5 Preparation
109
10.2.2.6 Safety and Risks
110
10.2.2.7 Procedure
110
10.2.2.8 Pass/Fail Criteria
111
10.2.3 Four Layer 1.7lb Canister
111
10.2.3.1 Top Drop Test #1: Thumb-Screw Locking Mechanism
111
10.2.3.2 Side Drop Test #1: Thumb-Screw Locking Mechanism
112
10.2.3.3 Side Drop Test #2: Epoxy Bond
113
10.2.3.4 Side Drop Test #3: Threaded Rod Locking Mechanism (Hand-Tightened)113
10.2.3.5 Side Drop Test #4: Threaded Rod Locking Mechanism (Wrench-Tightened)
115
10.2.3.5.1 Failure Analysis: Canister Half Fiber Failure and Delamination
116
10.2.3.6 lb Canister Conclusion
116
10.2.4 Three Layer 1.3lb Canister
117
10.2.4.1 Top Drop Test #1: Epoxy Bond
117
10.2.4.2 Side Drop Test #1: Epoxy Bond
117
10.2.4.2.1 Failure Analysis: Stiffening Ring Failure
118
10.2.4.2.2 Failure Analysis: Canister Half Failure
119
10.2.4.3 lb Canister Conclusion
119
11 Full Scale Manufacturing Analysis

119

12 Conclusion

123

13 References

125

6

List of Tables
Table 1. Current product benchmarking research was conducted to compare specifications of
products in the bear canister market.
Table 2. Benchmarking was performed on various lid latching mechanisms.
Table 3. Mechanical characteristics of composite sandwich core types are shown.
Table 4. Customer Requirements were developed from last year’s project description and talking
with the project stakeholders.
Table 5.​ ​Project Design Specifications
Table 6. Canister Lid materials
Table 7. The Pugh matrix evaluating corrugate geometry for lid composite sandwiches is shown.
A Go/No-Go evaluation was then completed.
Table 8. The two possible opening locations, top and middle, were evaluated against relevant
design criteria using the Pugh matrix process. The Go/No-Go evaluation is shown below.
Table 9. Pugh Matricies
Table 10. Short Fiber Pugh Matricies
Table 11. A final decision matrix was completed for the corrugated geometry.
Table 12. Ideas for the opening location are evaluated using a decision matrix. The strength,
manufacturing feasibility, and weight were the most important criteria for the opening location.
Table 13. Table 12 with Conditional Formatting
Table 14. FEA assumptions
Table 15. Rough cost estimate
Table 16. Summary of FEA Results for the middle and top opening designs
Table 17. A rough cost estimate is shown for each part of the selected middle opening design.
Table 18. Decision matrix determining prepreg carbon fiber as the selected manufacturing
material for the bear canister
Table 19. Corresponding Instron compressive forces are shown at selected deflection values.
Table 20. Nominal canister diameters and circularity
Table 21. The total cost of materials per canister
Table 22. Purchased Parts for the Bear Minimum Project
Table 23: Manufacturing Costs for the Bear Minimum Project
Table 24: Testing Costs for the Bear Minimum Project
Table 25: Future Anticipated Parts for the Bear Minimum Project
Table 26: Capital Investments and Labor Costs for the Bear Minimum Project
Table 27: Full Scale Production Costs for the Bear Minimum Project
Table 28. Manufacturing Processes for Stiffening Ring
Table 29. Pass Criteria for Drop Testing to be met
Table 30. Operations list for Bear Canister Production
Table 31. Labor Needed for 5,000 units per year
7

Table 32 Equipment Needed for 5,000 units per year
Table 33. Original Specification Sheet Comparison

8

List of Figures
Figure 1. A flow chart categorizing common sandwich core materials and geometries is shown.
Figure 2. US Patent 6434749
Figure 3. Image attached to patent number ​4,801,03.
Figure 4 & 5. Canister Sketch and Boundary
Figure 6. The bottom (front) and top (back) molds are shown. The bottom mold has the prepreg
pressed into it ready for curing.
Figures 7 & 8. Left: Composite layers are pressed in by hand into the mold. Right: Alignment
bolts holding mold assembly together with pressure port and plate at top.
Figures 9-12. Concept modeling prototypes
Figures 13 & 14. The canister assembly with the lid installed and locked was rendered. The
canister lid rendering shows the honeycomb core and latching tabs.
Figures 15 & 16. A trimetric view of the lid prototype shows the preliminary button placements
and protrusions. The bottom view of lid prototype shows the latching tabs.
Figure 17. The Von Mises stress visualization for the lid of the top opening design.
Figure 18. A deflection visualization for the lid of the top opening design.
Figure 19. Rendering of the middle opening selected design.
Figures 20 & 21. Sections of 3D printed prototype attached and locked. Close up view of the slot
latching mechanism.
Figure 22. Von Mises stress visualization is shown for an analogous middle aluminum ring
Figure 23. Deflection visualization for an analogous middle aluminum ring
Figure 24. The canister half is shown near ultimate compressive loading.
Figure 25. A dimetric view of the cross section reveals the double groove featured on the
stiffening ring.
Figure 26. The stiffening ring assembly is shown with a section view revealing the attachment
mechanism.
Figure 27. Two Different Carbon Manufacturing Processes
Figure 28. Previous year side deflection is shown before and after the impact.
Figure 29. At the observed impact time of .1s from last year’s project, the corresponding impact
force is 249.1 lb.
Figure 30. Finalized Stiffening Ring Cross Section Dimensions
Figure 31. FEA von mises stress plots for side loading (left) and top loading (right). The stress
safety factors of these tests were 1.80 and 1.49 respectively.
Figure 32. The testing jig created to test half canisters is shown. Two metal mounts are attached
to wooden two by fours providing supports for the canisters. PVC piping allows the jig to move
vertically.
Figure 33. After post processing, the Instron compressive force was plotted over measured
deflections for a half canister.
9

Figure 34. The 3D printed prototype proved the design’s attachment function.
Figure 35. Touch-off points and deviation for CMM results on canister inner diameter are shown.
Figure 36. All required vacuum bagging materials are shown with the bottom mold, four sidewall
carbon sheets, and four base carbon fiber sheets
Figure 37. The cross section of the stiffening ring shows what section corresponds to which
manufacturing procedure.
Figure 38: Center Mold
Figure 39: Mold Bottom Piece
Figure 40. Mold Top Piece
Figure 41. An exploded view of the mold shows how the three pieces will fit together during the
layup process.
Figure 42. Two Mold Parts and Vacuum Bagging
Figure 43. The canister is being levered out of the mold
Figure 44. The spacing ring mold parts and the .25” carbon fiber strips create a flush outer
surface.
Figure 45. The stiffening ring ready for curing.
Figure 46. The stiffening ring grooves are being scraped to increase efficiency of the acetone
dissolving process.
Figure 47. Stiffening Ring #1 mid layup is shown.
Figure 48. The enlarged mandrel is shown
Figure 49. Nuts were implemented into the layup for Stiffening Ring #3.
Figure 50. Original Instron Half Canister of a Four-Layer 5 hour cure
Figure 51. Instron Results from Various Cure Cycle Times
Figure 52. Full Assembly Instron Stiffness Comparison of Light and Heavy Canisters
Figure 53. Various Drop Testing Stills
Figure 54. Schematic of Drop Testing Apparatus
Figure 55. The top drop test impact with the 1.7 lb canister is shown.
Figure 56. The side drop test impact with the 1.7 lb canister is shown. The bolt hole is shown
shearing during the impact.
Figure 57. A close up view of the failure is shown. Four of the six bolt holes sheared during the
side impact.
Figure 58. The side drop test impact with the 1.7 lb canister and epoxy bond is shown.
Figure 59. The threaded rod locking mechanism is shown.
Figure 60. The side drop test with the 1.7 lb canister and hand-tightened threaded rod locking
mechanism is shown.
Figure 61. Post Impact Stiffening Ring Failure
Figure 62. The side drop test with the 1.7 lb canister and wrench-tightened threaded rod locking
mechanism is shown.
Figure 63. The canister half failed at the seam of the layup.
10

Figure 64. The top drop test impact with the 1.7 lb canister is shown.
Figure 65. Light Canister Fiber Failure on Impact
Figure 66 & 67. The stiffening ring failure is shown from the top view and the front view.
Figure 68. The canister half failure is shown from the inside and from the outside.
Figure 69. Manufacturing Key steps
Figure 70. Layout of Department Stations in a Manufacturing Space

11

List of Nomenclature
FEA - Finite Element Analysis
SIBBG - Sierra Interagency Grizzly Bear Association
Layup - Carbon Fiber being placed onto mold surface for curing
CAD - Computer Aided Design

12

1 Introduction & Abstract
The goal of this report is to review the final detailed design for the Bear Minimum Senior
Project. The report will provide the background information and the objectives required to
complete the designs, a discussion about the methods taken to select the final designs with initial
FEA and prototyping, and the detailed design including all necessary geometry, material,
manufacturing, cost and safety information. In addition, Section 5 includes the formal
documentation describing the procedures and results of manufacturing the canister body, which
was already designed by last year’s senior project team. The target audience for this project is the
ultralight backpacking community. Ultralight backpacking is a niche category of backpacking
camping. Ultralight backpackers are willing to pay more money for lighter products, even if the
item only saves them a few ounces. They are the stakeholders for this project, along with the
project sponsor, Nick Hellewell.
The ultralight backpacking community needs a strong, easy to use, safe bear canister that
is lighter than current market products for trekking in the backcountry. A full design of the lid for
the bear canister is to be completed. This includes the locking mechanism to ensure it is bear
proof, the interface between the lid and the canister, and the structure of the lid so it passes the
strength and weight specifications. The lid, along with the already designed canister body, is to
be manufactured with formal documentation. The lid will initially be tested separately and then
with the canister body as an assembly. All tests will be to either verify or reject one or more of
the design specifications listed later in this document. The overarching goal of the project is to
find a balance of two project requirements: making a rigid lid that is, when combined with the
canister body, less than 1.3 lb​f and still meeting the Interagency Grizzly Bear Committee (IGBC)
certification strength requirements. A complete list of the project goals is in the objectives
section including two reach goals.

13

2 Background
2.1 Rules, Regulations & Codes
2.1.1 Rules
Bear canisters provide a safety barrier between a backpacker’s food and wild bears. A
certified canister not only provides ease of mind, but is more likely to keep the user and food
safe. Testing is needed to ensure that bear canisters are market ready and outdoor ready. The
governing agency for bear canister testing is the Interagency Grizzly Bear Committee (IGBC)
which runs the testing and certification. The Sierra Interagency Black Bear Group (SIBBG) used
to perform testing so older bear canisters may still have the SIBBG certification.
Not all tested canisters are certified in all National Parks. Individual parks such as
Yosemite, Sequoia, and Inyo National Parks have their own list of certified canisters. [1].
Approved testing by the IGBC currently must take place in the West Yellowstone facility
between the dates of April 1st to October 31st for live bear testing. As of October 2016, live bear
canister testing costs $400 and an additional $75 for video footage. [2] The canister assembly
must pass both the visual inspection and live bear inspection which are defined as follows:
Visual Inspection:
“Testing is conducted in West Yellowstone, Montana at the Grizzly and Wolf
Discovery Center between April 1st and October 31st. First, there is a visual inspection of
the product. Product components such as hinges, latches etc. that might allow bears to
bend, break, or pry open the container with their claws are visually inspected. Further
visual inspection is to ensure that there are no loose parts, hanging debris, or sharp edges,
which could potentially cause harm to humans or bears.” [3]
Live Bear Test:
“Testing personnel will place food inside the container and will leave the
container inside of the bear enclosure. The testing is considered complete once the bear
breaches the container or the container has undergone 60 minutes of bear contact (i.e.
chewing, clawing, etc.). The container will undergo contact with several bears of various
sizes and experience in dealing with bear-resistant devices. Pictures are taken after the
14

testing and a report is made of the areas of the product that may have been subjected to
damage. Food containers are allowed gaps, tears, or holes of 1⁄4’’ or less to be considered
‘passed.’” [4]
For the Sierra Interagency Black Bear Group the testing happens in three distinct phases.
Although the SIBBG group is not currently in operation, their testing procedures provide a good
baseline certification. Older existing products still retain the SIBBG certification, so it is
beneficial for testing the strength characteristics of a canister. A bear canister needs to pass all
three phases of the SIBBG testing in order to receive certification. These phases are listed as
follows [5]:
1. A 100 lb​f weight will be dropped from 1 foot high. No failures in the materials or
assembly shall result. Elastic deflections must be less than 0.25 inch.
2. No failures shall result while in constant contact with bears.
3. Upon meeting the first two conditions, the canister receives "conditional approval" and
begins 3 months of field testing. If the canister fails just once during field testing, it will
lose conditional certification

2.2 Existing Solutions for Similar Problems
Most existing bear canisters resemble a cylindrical or side-curved cylindrical pressure
vessel. This allows the canisters to be longitudinally strong, store food easier, reduce stress
concentrations at corners, and fit inside a pack well. Some vessels use their shape to have
multiple purposes either as a stool or lids that function as cooking pans.
Other forms of food storage for bear protection are also available. A outdoor guide to
food handling storage from Recreational Equipment Incorporated (REI) highlights some of the
less common types of food storage methods. [6]
● Bear wire: ​Cable strung between trees which you can hang food bags from. Replaces the
need for natural tree branches.
● Bear poles: ​Tall, metal, stationary, man-made poles which resemble artificial trees. The
provide metal limbs and hooks for campers and backpackers to hang items from.
● Bear hangs: ​There are two types of bear hangs. The first is counterbalancing which is to
use a mass similar to your food mass to hoist your food up a tree with a rope.
Alternatively, bear-bagging is throwing a small mass over a branch to get a rope up to
hoist food.

15

● Bear boxes: ​Man made and stationary bear resistant containers often found in popular
campsites. They are very large and rectangular in shape. They provide quick and easy
access to food when mobility is not needed.
● Bear bags: ​Small sacks of durable material which vary in volume. They allow bears to
grab the bag but not puncture it or the contents.
Although the cylindrical canister shape is popular, other solutions to dealing with hungry
bears is using items such as bear sacks or bear boxes. Bear sacks follow the traditional method of
storing food in a bag and hoisting it over a tree limb to keep it off the forest floor. These sacks
are made of kevlar or other tough material, but they lack the storage space and bears have been
known to go onto tree limbs to tear through supporting ropes. Bear boxes on the other hand are
stationary, heavy duty, and expensive and are only provided at a small number of campsites. For
the avid ultralight backpacker neither of these two solutions may work in areas dense with bears.

2.3 Existing Products & Benchmarking
For the basic backpacker, owning a canister may seem like an arduous task as the
canisters can weigh 2-3 lb​f and are bulky in size and geometry. Despite these drawbacks,
canisters are necessary to avoid conflicts with bears and are legally required in certain
backpacking areas. Wildlife biologist Kate McCurdy noted that bears are intelligent animals and
will slowly recognize the look and feel of bear canisters over time and recall they are not worth
the effort to break into. There have been instances of bears in the New York Adirondack
mountains learning how to open bear canisters such as the BearVault 500. One particular bear
had learned how to push in a tab with her teeth that allowed the canister lid to be screwed off.
[7].
The current market for bear canisters is full of a variety of options ranging from canisters
holding a few days of food storage (300 cubic inches) to a week’s worth of food storage (650
cubic inches) which is the target size for the Bear Minimum canister. In order to better gauge the
competitiveness and innovative solutions currently available, Table 1 below highlights key
attributes in competitive market products. Although there are quite a few models of bear
canisters, most canisters are basic in design and geometry. A 2010 study found that although
canisters were similar, 69% of backpackers surveyed using canisters used the Garcia
Backpacker’s Cache canister. Additionally only a small percentage of canisters (11%) were
rented, and 9% complained that they needed more volume [8]. Our research yielded ten of the
most popular bear canisters on the market. Our findings are highlighted in Table 1 below.

16

Table 1. Current product benchmarking research was conducted to compare
specifications of products in the bear canister market.

Product
Name

Bearikade
Weekender
Bearikade
Expedition
Hunny
Canister
BearVault
BV500
BearVault
BV450
Counter
Assault

Weight
Price to
Size
to
Latching
Volume
Weight Price
Volume
Certified
LxD
Volum
Mechanism
Materials
Ratio
e Ratio
Used
[in x
(IGBC
[in​3​]
[oz]
[$] [oz/in​3​] [USD/in​3​]
-in]
/SIBBG)
Carbon
Fiber and
Aluminum
Ultem ​©
resin,
ceramic
alloy

10.5
x9

31

$288

0.05

0.44

900

14.5
x9

36

$349

0.04

0.39

710

12 x
9

700
Polycarbonate
449
Polymer
Blend

UDAP
No-Fed-Be Polymer
ar
Backpacker
ABS
s Cache
polymer
Garcia
Lighter1
PolyBig Daddy carbonate
Bear
Minimum

650

Carbon
Composite

12.7
x
8.7
8.7
x
8.3

25

$39

0.04

0.05

41

$80

0.06

0.11

33

$67

0.07

0.15

O-Ring Seal
with 3
Tested,
Quarter Turn but not
Metal
certified
Fasteners
2 lids, 3
screw side
door

Not
Tested

Screwtop
IGBC &
with single
SIBBG
ratchet lock
3 Stainless
Steel Turn
Locks
2 Stainless
Steel Turn
Locks

716

14 x
9

58

$70

0.08

0.1

IGBC &
SIBBG

455

10 x
8

39

$60

0.09

0.13

615

12 x
8.8

43

$75

0.07

0.12

Screwtop

IGBC

650

13 x
8.7

36

$100

0.06

0.15

Twist and
Lock Lid

IGBC

650

11 x
9

20.8

$500

0.03

0.83

IGBC

Not
Not
Determined Tested

IGBC = Interagency Grizzly Bear Committee
SIBBG = Sierra Interagency Black Bear Group

17

Ultralight backpackers need a solution which is just as strong as the existing solutions,
contains the same volume, but ultimately is much lighter. The ultralight backpacking market is a
niche market, but with product scarcity, it can be rationalized to use more expensive materials
for a lighter canister. Weight, more than cost, is of utmost importance for ultralight backpackers.
Aside from basic parameters such as volume, size, and weight, other benchmarking attributes of
interest are the weight to volume ratio and price to volume ratio.
The weight to volume ratio indicates how effectively the material is used in the product.
It is optimal for a canister to be both light and have a large capacity. Bear Minimum excels in
this category as it uses light composites while maintaining a large volume.
The second attribute of interest is the price to volume ratio. This indicates and normalizes
how expensive the product is for how much space you get inside. Customers ideally want a high
weight to volume ratio and low price to volume ratio. The cell shading in Table 1 indicates how
well each of the canisters performed in these key categories with green being the best
performing.
A critical part of the lid design is developing a compatible latching mechanism with the
existing canister body, as the latching mechanism is within the scope of the Bear Minimum
project. The second to last column in Table 1 briefly states the latching mechanism used on other
canisters. One common type is the button quarter turn metal fastener. These are small button
sized twist locks that have a swinging lock to unlatch the lid. These button quarter turn fasteners
require a coin or other slim object to turn them successfully. This ideally prevents a bear from
using a claw to open the canister. Table 2 below highlights common latching mechanisms used
for canisters, packages, bags, or food storage devices. Some of these latching mechanisms could
be incorporated into a bear canister.

18

Table 2. Benchmarking was performed on various lid latching mechanisms.
Latch Type

Product

Description

Image

O-ring with clamp Common water Rubber ring which acts as an
bottle
interface between edges.
Used for sealing rather than
latching.
Notched Slider
latch

Common hinge Slide to the side and then in
latch
the perpendicular direction.
Spring loaded prevents
accidental opening.

Tabbed Latches

Tupperware or
windows

Buckle

Springloaded

Screw

Pushing and pulling to
engage or disengage latch.
Requires two pieces to move
independently.

Backpack Strap Common pack buckle allows
buckle
for quick clipping of strap
segments.
Car seat slider

Spring loaded interface
between sections. Spring
acts like safety, but by
default is open.

Bottle threaded Threaded bolt or threaded lid
allows for tight joining of
assembly parts.

Ratcheting

Ratcheting
Mechanism or
strap ratchet

Ratcheting method allows
for tightening in one
direction. Mechanism will
not release accidently. High
stress on individual teeth.

Band with latch

Metal pipe tie
band

Metal pipe or band ties
allow for radial clamping
and tightening using a
screw.

Images from McMaster-Carr Catalog [9]
19

The final column in Table 2 is if the product has passed the Interagency Grizzly Bear
Committee (IGBC) testing for the canister. This testing must be passed in order for the product
to be used in some areas. Almost all the current market canisters have passed one form of testing
aside from the Bearikade, Hunny Cannister, and Bear Minimum. The bearikade has been tested
and proved with wild bears but is not formally certified. The Hunny Canister is still in the
development and funding phase, but could pose a formidable market opponent to the Bear
Minimum canister if it is certified.
Prototype canisters from 2015’s senior project failed to pass the deflection test
requirement of less than 0.25 inches of deflection under a specified static load. Structural
stiffening material will need to be used for the canister lid, and possibly canister body. One of
the most common types of structural stiffening is using a sandwich core, as seen in Figure 1
below.

Figure 1. A flow chart categorizing common sandwich core materials and
geometries is shown. [10]
Sandwich core geometry is crucial as it allows thin and light core material with geometric
advantages such as a beam or honeycomb pattern to achieve higher strengths. Sandwich core
materials can vary from metal all the way to foam and is further expanded on in Table 3 below.

20

Table 3. Mechanical characteristics of composite sandwich core types are shown.
Type

Honeycomb

Vinyl Sheet
Foam

End Grain

Polyurethane

Subtype

Shear
Density Compressive
Strength
[lbm/ft​3​] Strength [psi]
[psi]

Core Features

Nomex

3

72 -290

50-145

Common, light, good rigidity

Aluminum

4.5

440

75

Denser, but stronger than
nomex. Corrosion and heat
resistance

Divinycell

3-4

87

81

Good under impact and
loading cycles,thermoplastic,
low water absorption,
compatible with resin systems,
good with most layup
processes.

Divinymat

3.8

87

81

Conforms easily to curved
shapes (160°F max)

435

Easily layup with processes,
suitable for elevated
temperature cure prepreg.
Good fatigue properties

Balsa Wood

9.7

2

Sheet Foam

2-10

20-27

16-22

Mix and
Pour

3-4

87

81

Honeycomb
and filled in
cells

5-13

72-290

81

Does not crack swell, or split
under water exposure. High
strength to weight. Same
properties as mix and pour
foam 300°F max. Degrades
with long term sunlight. 1.3%
water absorption
Same properties as
honeycomb and sheet foam.
Foam provides shear
resistance for honeycomb

2.4 Patents
Extensive research was conducted on current patents to make sure the final Bear
Minimum canister parts or functions do not infringe on existing ideas associated with a US
patent. The two most relevant patents are further discussed below.

21

Relevant Patent #1:
The patent that holds the most relevance for this project is a patent claimed by our
competitor, Wild Ideas, LLC, regarding the Bearikade series of bear canisters.

Figure 2. US Patent 6,343,749 B1 shows the Bearikade bear canister assembly
from a top isometric view [11].
The patent eliminates the possibility of very specific inward facing collar orientation with
channels for the locking mechanism. If possible attributes of the Bear Minimum canister, after
ideation and prototyping, lead to a design similar to the one stated in this patent, the patent will
be revisited and further analyzed.
Relevant Patent #2:
Another relevant patent is assigned to Netra Plastics. They claim a canister with recesses
on the inner surface of the canister body with corresponding fingers sticking down from the lid.
The canister assembly is shown in Figure 3.

Figure 3. Image attached to patent number ​4,801,03. ​Netra Plastic’s claimed
canister in side section partially cutaway view. Numbers 50 and 26 are

22

pointing to the male outward finger curvature and female recesses,
respectively [12].
Similarly, if explored ideas for the Bear Minimum canister assembly are relevant to Netra
Plastic’s claimed canister, the patent will be revisited and further analyzed.

2.5 Past Technical Problems
The Bear Minimum project is a continuation of the ​Ultra-Light Bear Canister ​senior
project from 2015. The senior project report from the 2015 year is available through the Cal Poly
Digital Commons under mechanical engineering [18]. Section 5.3 of the report highlights
manufacturing issues and recommendations. Some of these failures are common composite
manufacturing issues, while some are project specific due to the unique geometry, bladder
molding, and custom two-piece bladder tooling.
The 2015 year team created the canister body, but they did not create a canister lid to
complete the assembly. This resulted in both fiber failure and excessive horizontal deflection
when the assembly was subject to the drop test. This may be attributed to either little technical
knowledge, inaccurate stress assumptions, stress concentrations, poor propagation along load
paths, or incorrect boundary conditions.
Team dynamics of last year’s project also posed a technical roadblock as many of the
team members were not familiar with either lightweight backpacking products or basic
composite manufacturing processes. Although the Bear Minimum team is comprised of only two
individuals the members have knowledge that spans both areas.
Some manufacturing problems that arose were from the molds and machines used to
create the molds and bladder. The shopbot used to machine out the foam mold cavity had errors
in depth and cutting feed rate resulting in a two week delay. A foam core was also made to create
a silicone bladder for the internal geometry of the canister. The silicon bladder had many
wrinkles in it and prevented future layups from having a good surface finish and layer laminate.
The autoclave used to cure the molds did not allow moisture to release well causing
condensation. Additionally the molds did not release well causing them to need to be removed by
destructive means.
The mold pattern used also posed significant issues as the two piece mold caused a flange
in the composite to form during manufacturing. This flange needed to be reinforced and cut off
after the post-bond was complete. This also provided significant alignment issues as the flanges
needed to be aligned properly with a bolt pattern.

23

2.6 Common Testing & Validation Procedures
2.6.1 Destructive Testing
Destructive testing is common method of testing material properties but results in broken
samples that must be thrown away. Composite samples often yield at stresses much lower than
data tables suggest. This can be due to a variety of factors such as porosity, poor layer bonding,
foreign material, excess resin or fiber, or user error. The most common is porosity, which is
caused by “incorrect, or non-optimal, cure parameters such as duration, temperature, pressure, or
vacuum bleeding of resin.” It is possible for composite samples to have tensile strengths closer to
half of the commonly accepted values
There are two main destructive tests which can utilized: tensile testing and acid digestion
testing. Tensile testing is quite common and lets us either evaluate the canister properties, the
corrugate properties, or our carbon laminate properties. All three would provide valuable data
and allow for better understanding the material properties. Acid digestion is simple method of
finding the fiber volume of the sample. It eats away at the epoxy to reveal just the fibers. It helps
determine the void percentage. In other words it helps calculates the amount of resin content in
the sample for analysis by using the difference in weights.

2.6.2 Non Destructive Testing
Nondestructive testing (NDT), unlike destructive testing, does not ruin the part and does
not require a tensile sample. NDT is widely used on parts that are already made into the final
product and geometry.
NDT defers from destructive testing in that it locates the source problematic areas, it does
not require a sample, it’s more easily repeatable, and keeps the part intact. NDI can vary from
inexpensive such as tap testing, to expensive methods such as shearography for critical parts.
Often NDT will be utilized on consumer ready parts ready for use, an extreme example of this
would be a Boeing 787 fuselage.
The most common non-destructive testing methods and a brief description are highlighted below:
● Visual Inspection
○ NDT using no equipment. Surface checks for abrasions, cuts, dents, bubbles, layer
delamination, and general contamination. A simple first line of investigation.
24

● Tap Testing
○ Secondary testing following the visual testing which using a pulse input, or tap
and listens to the sound. The sound is effective at showing areas of delamination
and porosity when the sound changes. The tap test is widely used, cost effective,
and computer software compatible.
● Ultrasonic
○ Similar to the tap test, ultrasonic testing listens to the echo of a pulse or the wave
that is transmitted through the sample. Ultrasonic is much more accurate than the
tap test and can detect delamination, porosity, and matrix damage.
● X-Ray Inspection
○ Inspection with X rays is a proven technique that can penetrate thick laminates
and non-planar geometry. It is used to detect density changes in the sample
allowing it to detect more flaws such as moisture in the sample as well as the
general porosity and delamination.
● Heat Flux Thermography
○ Using infrared cameras to monitor the sample, heat is transferred across the
sample. Thermography measures the effects from thermal changes and locates
delaminations and contamination such as moisture and solvents.
● Electrical
○ Flaws in a composite sample change the electrical resistivity of the sample.
Aligning positive and negative leads on both sides of the sample allows an
electrical field to be generated. Resistivity changes in the sample can be detected
by mapping the field.
● Shearography
○ Shearography measures the deformation of a sample when under a loaded
condition. Any deformations will clearly show up on the in plane and out of plane
deflection profiles as distinct changes in slope. The deflection change indicates a
delamination, crack, or crushed core. Various means of loading can be used in
shearography such as heat excitement, vacuum pulling, and vibrations.
The bear minimum team hopes to perform NDT on our final canisters if ample resources
are available. Cal Poly currently does not have many resources for NDT, so testing needs to be
outsourced or simple in nature.
25

3 Objectives
3.1 Project Goals
3.1.1 Project Goals for Current Scope
The project goals were created along with the customer requirements of the project.
Similar to developing the customer requirements, a broad knowledge of the current bear canister
market was necessary to develop the project goals. Proposed goals by Nick Hellewell are also
included in the project goals which are listed below.
1. A successful manufacturing job of the canister body (designed last year) will be
completed and documented. *
2. A lid that is a structural element of the canister assembly will be designed, built, and
tested.*
3. The canister assembly will be tested by two drop tests. A 100 lb​f weight will be dropped
from 1 ft high once on the side of the canister assembly and once on the top of the
assembly.*
4. The canister will have an inside volume of at least 650 in​3​.
5. The canister will have a maximum mass of 1.3 lb​f​.
6. The total cost of the project expenditures will not exceed $2000.
7. The lid & canister body interface will have a locking mechanism.
8. Lid removal will not take longer than 30 s.
9. Lid removal will not require any external tools.
10. The canister assembly will not puncture through thin fabrics such as a backpack or tent
therefore sharp edges will be avoided.
* These goals define the scope of the Bear Minimum Project

3.1.2 Project Reach Goals
The reach goals do not fall under the current scope of the project, and will only be
addressed if time permits. Two reach goals are listed below.
1. The manufacturing process will be improved until it is repeatable and reliable.
2. The mechanical design of the canister body will be revisited and improved. This reach
goal will only be necessary if the canister assembly fails the strength tests.
26

3.1.3 Project Scope and Boundary Sketch
The current scope of the Bear Minimum project was agreed upon by Nick Hellewell
(Bear Minimum Project Sponsor), Dr. Peter Schuster (Senior Project Coordinator), and Adam
Eisenbarth and Rama Adajian (Bear Minimum Team Members).The scope of the project is also
represented in the boundary sketch, Figure 4.

Figure 5. The boundary sketch is a visual representation of the scope of the
project. The only part that will be within the project scope through the
complete design process is the canister lid.

3.2 Quality Function Deployment (QFD) Process
3.2.1 Overview
The Quality Function Deployment (QFD) process was utilized once the project goals and
customer requirements were established. The customer requirements are a list of guidelines
which meet the needs of the ultralight backpacking community; therefore, some statements
contain some subjectivity and vagueness. The QFD process creates operational definitions of
these statements turning qualitative information into quantitative criterium. The House of
Quality, which is attached in Appendix A, was the technique used during the QFD process
resulting in the development of the design specifications as seen in Table 5. Furthermore, an
explanation of how the QFD process was enacted for the Bear Minimum Project is in sections
3.2.3.1, 3.2.3.2, and 3.2.4.

3.2.2 Customer Requirements
The customer requirements for this project were developed by analyzing the current
market for bear canisters. This was done by posting forum discussions on Reddit [18] and
27

TrailGroove [19] in order to reach out to the ultralight backpacking community. Personal friends
and family, who participate in ultralight or regular backpacking, were also consulted for further
information and preferences on possible bear canister features and price range expectations. An
extensive review on competitor’s products was also conducted to become more knowledgeable
about this market. The list is based on the current market along with requirements proposed by
the project sponsor Nick Hellewell. The list of the customer requirements is shown in Table 4.
Table 4. Customer Requirements were developed from last year’s project
description and talking with the project stakeholders.
Requirement Category

Description

Part Geometry and
Characteristics

Canister must be lightweight
Canister may not have any large openings or gaps
Canister must be big enough to fit enough food for a three night
backpacking trip for two people

Operation

Canister does not need extra tools to open compartment besides
items commonly brought while backpacking
Canister must accommodate a wide variety of hand shapes and sizes

Forces and Torques

Canister must be tested against the once administered SIBBG
strength standards

Materials

All materials used for the canister must be EHS (Environmental
Health and Safety) certified

Safety

Canister may not have any sharp or protruding edges
Canister parts cannot classify as choking hazards

Motion

Canister must have a latching mechanism so bear cannot open
canister lid

Production

Quality Control
Assembly
Cost

Molds must be easily created in-house
Manufacturing must be possible using equipment at Cal Poly
Canister parts and assembly must be tested
Canister has minimal visible weave distortion on exterior
Canister has minimal void fraction
Canister lid is easy to put on and take off
Canister lid must sit flush with top surface
Total cost for the canister cannot exceed $2,000. This includes costs
required for any stage in the design process.
28

3.2.3 Design Specifications
The design specifications of the Bear minimum project are listed in Table 5 below and
developed with the QFD process.
Table 5.​ ​Project Design Specifications
#

Specification

Target

Tolerance

Risk

Verification

Derivation
Method

1

Internal Volume

650 in​3

Min

L

I

P

2

Size (Length x Diameter)

11” x 9”

+/- 0.25”

L

I

P

Total Weight

1.3 lb​f

Max

M

A,I

P

4

Lid Weight

0.2 lb​f

Max

M

A,I

P

5

Largest gap diameter

0.25”

Max

M

[A,T]

BTC

Quality
Control

6

Diameter of the opening in
canister body

6.5”

+/- 0.25”

L

I

P

7

Void volume fraction

5%

Max

M

[T,I]

CS

Operation

8

Torque necessary to open
5.1 ft-lb​f​*
canister

Max

L

T

RS

Forces and
Torques

9

Weight dropped during
the drop test from 1 ft high

100 lb​f

Min

H

A,T

BTC

0.125”

Min

M

I

P

Category

Part Geometry 3

10
Safety

Motion

Production
and Quality

Cost

Filleted edge radius

11

Removable parts sizes
(choking hazard)

1.75” x
1”

Min

L

I

RS

12

Time to remove latched
lid

30 sec

Max

L

T

RS

13

Amount of weave
distortion on exterior
(normalized by surface
area)

15%

Max

H

I,T

CS

Time in live contact with
14 bear (according to SIBBG
Certification)

60 min

Min

H

T

BTC

15

$2,000

Max

M

A

P

Total cost

Table 5 (continued).​ ​A key for the last two columns is provided.
29

Risk of not meeting goal:
H = High
M = Medium
L = Low
* = Raw data NASA [18]

Verification:
A = Analysis
T = Testing
I = Inspection
S = Similarity
[ ] = Subject to change

Derivation Method:
RS = Research & Statistics
CS = Composite Standards
BTC = Bear Testing
Certification Standards
P = Predetermined

3.2.3.1 Compliance Discussion
Four methods to determine specification compliance and verification will be
administered: analysis, testing, inspection, and similarity. Software programs including but not
limited to SolidWorks, EES, Matlab, and Abaqus will be used for the analysis compliance.
Testing will include formal tests where specific parameters will be defined and tested. Inspection
includes simple measurements including but not limited to distance, mass, force, and torque
measurements. Specifications which comply with similarity include comparing a certain
specification to a similar part or function. For this project, because the Bear Minimum canister
will be an innovative product in a small niche market, no similarity compliances will exist.
3.2.3.2 Risk Discussion
Risks are rated a low, medium, or high rating. This is representative of the likelihood a
canister characteristic will comply to the respective specification. The reason a high rating was
assigned to the 100 lb​f drop test specification is the result of failure encountered during the drop
test for testing 2015’s Bear Minimum canister. The same canister body design will be
manufactured and tested. The only difference is the addition of the lid which will act as a
structural member in the canister assembly. A high risk was assigned to the timed live bear
testing specification for similar reasons to the drop test specification. This test has never been
administered for a fully composite bear canister, therefore there is a possibility of not complying.
A high risk was assigned to the amount of weave distortion due to the difficulties with
composites manufacturing. Research on composites manufacturing, along with information from
last years senior project, shows the manufacturing for shapes such as a cylindrical composite part
to pose challenges relating to the weave distortion of the composite fibers.

3.2.4 QFD Discussion
The methods for deriving the design specifications, in Table 5, from the customer requirements
can generally be categorized into four areas. Each specification will be further explained within
the category it falls into.
30

1. Research and Statistics (RS). This category relates to items where a statistic or other
research based information were used to derive a specification from a customer
requirement.
a. Customer requirement: Canister lid is easy to put on and take off
Specification: The maximum torque necessary to open the canister lid is 5.1 ft-lb​f​.
Method & Explanation: Statistical research was conducted to determine the
average one handed maximum torque supination for a female. Two standard
deviations, to accommodate 99% of the sample size, were subtracted from this
number to get a final value of 5.1 ft-lb​f ​ [21].
b. Customer requirement: Canister parts cannot classify as choking hazards
Specification: Minimum size for removable parts is 1.75”x1”
Method & Explanation: Research was conducted to check the legal code for the
size of a choking hazard. The minimum size for a part to be considered a choking
hazard is 1.75”x1” inches.
c. Customer requirement: Canister lid is easy to put on and take off
Specification: Maximum time to remove latched lid is 30 s.
Method & Explanation: This specification was derived by a trial with a very large
factor of safety introduced. Trials to time the operation of opening the Bear Vault
canister were conducted. The time span ranged from 6 seconds to 10 seconds for
people who had knowledge of how the latching mechanism works on the Bear
Vault. A design factor of safety ranging of 3 to 5, respectively was applied to
calculate the maximum opening time of 30 s. The reason a large factor of safety
was included is due to the relative lack of importance for the amount of time to
open a bear canister. Obviously, a customer would not want to spend an hour
opening the canister; however, spending 30 s three to five times a day is not a
negligible factor with regards to the demand of the product.
2. Predetermined (P). The specifications in this category were either given to us by Nick
Hellewell or were already determined by the Bear Minimum team last year. Because the
canister body design was completed last year along with molds used to manufacture the
body, some specifications for the canister are already set and predetermined.
a. Customer Requirement: Canister must be big enough to fit enough food for a
three night backpacking trip for two people
Specification: Minimum internal volume of 650 in​3
31

Method & Explanation: The molds from last year’s senior project team will be
used to manufacture this project’s canister body which is the determining factor of
the internal volume. The addition of the lid might add some internal volume, but
the volume cannot decrease.
b. Customer Requirement: Canister must be big enough to fit enough food for a
three night backpacking trip for two people
Specification: Canister size (Length x Diameter) of: 11” x 9” +/- 0.25”
Method & Explanation: The molds from last year’s senior project team will be
used to manufacture this project’s canister body which is the determining factor of
the canister’s length and diameter. The addition of a lid could potentially add
length to the canister; however, a tolerance of +/- .25” will account for all selected
possible lid designs and manufacturing anomalies. If a lid adds more than .25” of
length to the canister, the design would be too bulky and most likely too heavy.
c. Customer Requirement: Canister must be lightweight
Specification: Maximum total weight of 1.3 lb​f
Method & Explanation: The weight of the canister assembly was set by Nick
Hellewell based on his idea for an ultralight bear canister. For this canister to
appeal to the ultralight backpacking market, there has to be a maximum allowable
weight constraint, and this was where that line was drawn. This then sets the total
weight of the canister assembly to 1.3 lb​f because of the already predetermined
weight of the canister body of 1.1 lb​f​.
d. Customer Requirement: Canister must be lightweight
Specification: Maximum lid weight of .2 lb​f
Method & Explanation: The weight of the canister assembly was set by Nick
Hellewell based on his idea for an ultralight bear canister. This then sets the lid
weight to .2 lb​f because the already designed and manufactured canister body
weighs 1.1 lb​f​. This data is available from last years senior project’s Final Design
Report. [22]
e. Customer Requirement: Canister must accommodate a wide variety of hand
shapes and sizes
Specification: Diameter of the opening in the canister body will be 6.5” +/- 0.25”
Method & Explanation: The molds from last year’s senior project team will be
used to manufacture this project’s canister body which is the determining factor of
the canister’s opening diameter. Research last year went into figuring out a
32

sufficient opening diameter to accommodate all hand sizes. A tolerance of +/0.25” will account for all manufacturing anomalies.
f. Customer Requirement: Canister may not have any sharp or protruding edges
Specification: Minimum filleted edge radii of 0.125”
Method & Explanation: The molds from last year’s senior project team will be
used to manufacture this project’s canister body which is the determining factor of
the canister’s filleted edge radii.
g. Customer Requirement: Total cost for the canister cannot exceed $2,000. This
includes costs required for any stage in the design process.
Specification: Maximum total cost of $2,000
Method & Explanation: This cost projection was imposed by Nick Hellewell.
3. Composite Standards (CS). The composite industry defines a successful manufactured
composite layup as having: (1) A maximum void volume fraction of 5% [19] for defining
a successful composite part and (2) The amount of weave distortion to not exceed 15% of
total surface area. These are two specifications derived from the customer requirements
of having a canister that has minimal void fraction and a canister that has minimal visible
weave distortion on exterior, respectively
4. Bear Testing Certification Standards (BTC). Because the canister assembly will be
applying for certifications from the IGBC, and the SIBBG test still reveals relevant load
cases to a bear interaction, specifications were derived according to the requirements
imposed to pass the certification process. The criterium directly transfer to our
specifications table. They are listed below.
a. Customer Requirement (proposed by Nick Hellewell): Canister must be tested
against the once administered SIBBG strength standards.
b. Specifications:
i.
A minimum weight of 100 lb​f must be dropped during the drop test from 1
ft high. This mean the canister body cannot experience any structural
failure of parts or deflections over 0.25 in (meeting the test criteria). Our
specification states that this is the minimum weight the canister must
withstand.
ii. The canister must spend a minimum of 60 minutes in live contact with a
bear
iii.
The maximum gap diameter for a bear canister is .2 inches
iv.
The minimum weight during the drop test from 1 ft high is 100 lbf
33

4 Management Plan
4.1 Milestones
A key attribute to a highly successful project is the ability to quickly establish a base
timeline. One common method of creating an organizational timeline is creating a Gantt chart. A
Gantt chart identifies key milestones and the estimated time to completion. Each of these
milestones can be linked to other milestones or sub-milestones to create an overall outline of the
project. The basic project framework, as established by the senior project curriculum, is the
primary proposal, preliminary design proposal, critical design proposal, and the final project
report. These important dates are from the senior project syllabus or determined by the team and
are as follows:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

October 25, 2016:​ Project Proposal Due (Course Goal)
November 5, 2016: ​Manufacture canister body from 2015 senior project (Team Goal)
November 17, 2016:​ Preliminary Design Report Due (Course Goal)
February 7, 2017:​ Critical Design Report Due (Course Goal)
March 16, 2017​: Project Update (Course Goal)
May 2, 2017:​ Hardware and Safety Demo (Course Goal)
June 2, 2017:​ Project Expo and Final Report Due (Course Goal)

Our team organization is simple due to a small team size of two people. The
responsibilities established in our team project highlight these areas.

4.2 Gantt Chart
A useful method of organization is a Gantt chart. A Gantt chart provides a visual timeline
of the project to see how project tasks and events are sequenced. The Bear Minimum project
follows the basic outline highlighted in the senior project syllabus.
It is year long project contains four base milestone: the project proposal (PP), preliminary
design report (PDR), critical design report (CDR), and the final project expo (FDR). The project
proposal and two design reports document the conceptualization, design process, prototyping,
and building of the canister. A complete Gantt chart can be seen in Appendix F with task
descriptions and completion percentages.

34

4.2.1 Outstanding Tasks
The Gantt chart discussed above describes the basic outline for the project. Outstanding
tasks that were included in the Gantt chart have been tentatively scheduled. The Bear Minimum
team has reduced the potential design options into two categories. One involves a top opening
canister (including lid and latching mechanism) and the second category involves a middle
opening canister where the “clamshell” like design would allow the canister to open in the center
without a lid. An analysis to determine which style of canister will be selected can be seen in
Section 6. Meetings with our project sponsor and obtaining general community opinion from
online forums was also taken into consideration.
Additionally the opportunity of having a custom bladder created from a 3rd party vendor
is being investigated. If the custom bladder is worth the additional cost for the increased part
quality and ease of manufacturing it will be added to the manufacturing process. The custom
bladder will have a lead time and also need very specific CAD files such that a simple male mold
can be used for the bladder manufacturing. In return, it is anticipated that a custom bladder will
increase part quality by allowing higher pressures (up to 100 psi​g​) and repeatable part quality.
Lastly, basic proof of concept prototyping has been included within the PDR. More
extensive prototyping in the future will be included in later reports. These remaining prototypes
may be made from rapid prototyping or using “wet” carbon instead.

4.3 Team Member Roles
Responsibilities for Adam Eisenbarth:
a. Communications Lead
● Be main point of communication with sponsor and other campus experts
● Facilitate meetings with sponsor and project coordinator
b. Team Treasurer
● Maintain team’s travel budget and logistics
● Maintain team’s material budget and expense sheet
c. CAD lead
● Creates and ensures that CAD drawings are completed
● Collects CAD drawings for external and stock parts used
Adam will function as the main point of contact for this project as our communications
officer and and treasurer. He will be the primary email coordinator between our sponsor and our
35

project team and facilitate meetings. It is important he maintains proper contact and records
expenses when purchasing materials and receiving reimbursements.
Adam’s final role is to be the coordinator of the CAD drawings. He will be creating the
detailed drawings and ensure that any parts used in the assembly are documented well for reports
and team reference.

Responsibilities for Rama Adajian:
a. Information Management & Chief Editor
● Store information for team Google Drive
● Record manufacturing processes used
● Edit official documents and reports
b. Scheduling Coordinator
● Maintain a Gantt chart and update on a regular basis
● Log hours of meetings and workdays
c. Manufacturing Lead
● Responsible for leading manufacturing efforts and overseeing work safety
● Work with shop techs or professors to schedule shop or lab time as needed
Rama will function as the information manager as well as the testing and manufacturing
lead. He will ensure that technical reports are up to date and managed properly through
information management applications such as Google Drive, Gantt charts, and Google Calendar.
On the technical side, Rama will be responsible for managing the testing and
manufacturing efforts for the team. This may include gathering materials, scheduling shop times,
and coordinating with professors to gain insight on manufacturing processes, testing procedures,
or testing fixtures and jigs.

4.4 Safety Hazard Identification Checklist
The safety hazard identification checklist provides a list of hazards regarding aspects of
the project which have been identified to ensure they are addressed in the final design and
manufacturing. The design hazard checklist can be seen in Appendix F at the end of this report.
A total of six hazards were identified and potential corrective actions were brainstormed for this
project. A quick description of each hazard and mitigation plans are as follows:

36

● Sharp edges or features on part
○ All composite layups have sharp edges where fibers inadvertently stick out,
delamination occurs, or between seaming locations. These edges are sharp in nature
and are easily mitigated by proper design or (1) sanding the edges with fine grit
sandpaper and (2) use of rubber or soft materials to cover up exposed edges.
● Design requires user to exert abnormal effort or physical posture during usage
○ The latching mechanism may require the user to grip the canister base firmly while
one or two hands are needed to open any releases. These releases can be made such
that they are (1) light in force needed to open and (2) ergonomically placed for hands.
● Materials known to be hazardous to humans involved in the design or manufacturing
○ The current release agent used to remove the canister from the mold after curing is
Frekote ®. Frekote is extremely toxic, causes skin irritation, and ingestion is harmful
to the central nervous system or fatal under prolonged exposure. According to the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) it has a flammability class of 3
indicating it is flammable at temperatures of 73 to 100°F. This can be corrected by (1)
using respirators and latex gloves when handling and applying release agents and (2)
using a wax based release such as Partall Paste® or water based release such as
FibRelease® to remove the canister from the mold.
● System exposed to environmental conditions such as humidity, cold & hot temperatures.
○ The canister is intended for use in the outdoors. This implies it will be exposed to
rough environmental conditions for long durations of time. Composite materials are
particularly susceptible to hot temperatures, pressure, and moisture. Many epoxies are
thermoplastics and will become fluid under high temperatures. Moisture in the air will
affect the canister as carbon will retain 1-2% moisture by weight and wood based
composites will start to deteriorate. Additionally, heating up of the canister may cause
the internal air of the canister to heat up, expand , and increase in pressure. These three
environmental issues can be addressed by (1) using epoxies that are solid at 120°F, (2)
avoid exposure of wood or bamboo core material to the environment, and finally (3)
ensure the composite can handle an internal pressure of 17.8 psia under heated
conditions. The “dry” transition temperature of our prepreg epoxy is 185°F allowing
hot air to escape after this threshold. See appendix B for hand calculations.
● System used in unsafe manner.
○ With the barrel shaped design it is possible that a small child or user may accidentally
place the canister on his or her head. The canister could also accidently be sat on
without the lid attached causing it to fall in. Backpackers should (1) keep out of reach
37

of children by providing a warning label for the user, and (2) not use the canister as a
stool unless canister is secured completely.
● Other potential hazards.
○ Carbon dust can provide significant hazards in both manufacturing and use. Normal
wear and tear on the canister will cause it to slowly degrade and dust may be spread
around. The proximity to the user’s food provides a slight concern as carbon dust may
get in contact with the food. The effect of ingesting carbon dust is not known;
however, it can cause skin and eye irritation to exposed areas. This can be improved
by (1) adding a thin layer of sealant material to the inside of the canister to catch dust.

5 Manufacturing the Previous Canister Body
5.1 Overview
The Bear Minimum project is a continuation of the 2015-2016 senior project. To better
understand the project, experience technical challenges, and improvements to make, it was
determined it would be beneficial to manufacture the canister per design and manufacturing
methods determined in 2015. Using previous equipment and tooling a canister was successfully
created the test canister body. In accordance to our project scope the manufacturing process has
been clearly documented below.

5.2 Molds

Figure 6. The bottom (front) and top (back) molds are shown. The bottom mold
has the prepreg pressed into it ready for curing.
38

Reusing the previous molds from the last year was the most economical method of
recreating the canister body. To make the molds, last year’s project team machined medium
density fiberboard (MDF) negative molds Cal Poly Aerospace Hangar ShopBot. Plaster was
poured into the MDF mold creating a positive mold. These plaster molds were finally joined
together and 9 layers of carbon fiber tooling prepreg fabric were laid-up over the plaster to create
the final negative carbon mold shown in Figure 6. Finally, surface roughness and finish was
improved by using Bondo auto filler and sandpaper.

5.3 Pre-Layup Procedure
Before the layup can begin, the equipment and materials must be obtained and processed.
The silicon bladder used to form the inner surface of the canister is susceptible to wear and tear
from handling and oven pressurization. A leak test was performed using water as the fluid of
choice and careful observation of water droplets. One small leak was discovered and patched
using two part 1:1 mix ratio EZ-brush silicon and letting set overnight at room temperature.
Secondly, both the bladder and mold surfaces must be cleaned, sanded if needed, and a
release agent applied to the surfaces. A release agent ensures the composite part can easily be
separated from the mold and bladder surfaces after it is done curing. The mold surfaces and
bladder were coated with 5 layers of the release agent Frekote ® . Failure to apply a release agent
or film means the part or mold must be removed by destructive methods.
Minimal processing equipment was needed for the canister manufacturing. A small
vacuum assisted in compressing the bladder to the insert through the top of the canister, then the
pressure port was inserted and all seals were double checked.

5.4 Layup Procedure
The laminate plies are prepared by removing a section of the prepreg carbon fiber roll
and laying it flat on a clean surface. Templates prepared from the 2015 Bear Minimum Project
team act as cutting guidelines for the carbon sheets. Each template is taped to the plastic wrap on
the prepreg and the shapes are cut out using an exacto knife.
The plies are carefully pressed into the canister top and bottom mold halves by hand and
adjusted as needed. This technique can be seen in Figures 7 and 8 where carbon is being pressed.
The top half of the canister needs four layers wrapped around the diameter. Each layer’s seam
needs to be rotated 90° from the previous layer’s seam. This ensures that stress concentrations at
the seams do not multiply in one area. These seam are also reinforced by overlapping the edge
39

layers by ¼” for strengthening. To ensure proper laminate bonding and minimal void content,
care must be taken to ensure the layers are properly pressed against the mold and previous layers.
This is done carefully by hand and then final pressing is done using a soft polymer squeegee. For
difficult to access or stiffer areas a heat gun set on low at 225°F can be used to temporarily
soften the prepreg so plies can then be fully pressed into the mold.

Figures 7 & 8. Left: Composite layers are pressed in by hand into the mold.
Right: Alignment bolts holding mold assembly together with
pressure port and plate at top.
The canister assembly consists of the bottom and top halves of the mold. The top mold
half is carefully aligned and set down onto the bottom mold with a vertical 1” overlap seam. The
two halves are easily aligned with four corner alignment bolts. Once aligned the two halves can
be bolted together with the remaining 10 thicker bolts as seen on the right in Figure 8. The
bladder can then be attached to the metal support plate, inserted into the cavity, and inflated.

5.5 Curing and Post Processing
The prepreg carbon fiber is manufactured as an epoxy-carbon matrix. The epoxy is a
thermoplastic and must be heated to allow for changes in geometry. Heating of the prepreg
carbon fiber is achieved with the help of a large oven and the Honeywell HC 900 controller. The
curing process is specific to the epoxy and documentation needs to be obtained to verify the cure
cycle. The composite canister is sealed up and placed into the oven for curing and the curing
process is as follows:
● Load cure recipe into computer and remote load to Honeywell HC 900 oven.
● Place canister into oven away from walls. Elevate the canister with cylinder blocks to
allow airflow under base and more even heat distribution.
40

● Pressurize canister bladder by attaching canister nipple to internal oven pressure line.
Open pressure line and pressurize to 30 psi​g​ by adjusting pressure regulator.
● Start cure cycle: Monitor process and cure progress using integrated thermocouples. Cure
canister using epoxy manufacturer’s recommended cure cycle below:
○ Ramp up​ oven to 250° F at a rate of 4°F per minute.
○ Hold​ temperature at 250°F for 180 minutes (3 hours).
○ Ramp down​ temperature at rate of 4°F per minute until 130°F.
● Open oven doors to assist with cooling. Cool until 110°F.
● Shut off air pressure line, blowers, and oven power. Release bladder pressure with nipple
before opening canister.

5.6 Results and Discussion
5.6.1 Overview
The prototype canister based on 2015’s design specifications came out with a great
surface finish. The extra time used to press in the fabrics to get a nice outside layer was quite
evident in the final product. The team was happy with the results, but unfortunately there were
difficulties removing the bottom half of the mold from the canister. Since the canister was not
manufactured with the lid seam it provided new difficulties in removing the base mold.

5.6.2 Suggestions for Improvement
The manufacturing process provided valuable knowledge for working with prepreg
carbon fiber. Improvements that can increase the efficiency and part quality are identified below:
1. Increase bladder pressure:
A better part and surface finish would be achieved if the bladder pushes the
prepreg carbon up against the mold walls with a larger force. We used a pressure of 25
psi​g when curing the canister which allowed for a good surface finish and ply lamination.
A higher pressure would help achieve an even better lamination, even carbon distribution,
and a superior surface finish.
2. Purchase a custom bladder:
In order to increase the bladder pressure, it is recommended to purchase a custom
bladder. This bladder would provide three main benefits. First, the bladder would have
smooth surfaces. This would remove the seams and inconsistencies in the current silicon
41

bladder which diminish the quality of the surface finish of the part. Secondly, a higher
pressure could be achieved due to the integrated pressure port into the bladder. Higher
pressure would make the canister body more robust. Lastly, a more repeatable process
could be achieved as multiple bladders in the future could be used knowing that they are
identical.
3. Pleat composites as needed:
As with many composite processes, successfully laying up a 2D ply onto a curved
3D surface poses issues. Small pleats in non-critical areas of the plies may help the
composite better sit inside the mold. This would help the laminate better sit and adhere to
the mold surface and previous layers.
4. Remachine top metal alignment ring:
The metal alignment ring used at the top of the canister to align the pressure port
was not made very precisely. A better machined alignment ring would prevent air from
escaping, align the bolts better, and form a better seal on the vacuum line. A groove could
also be cut for vacuum tape to be easily placed into. The tape helps form an airtight
backup seal in case the pressure port has leaks.
5. Make better cutting templates:
The templates used to cut the carbon sheets were SolidWorks drawings that were
printed on a plotter. The templates were taped down to the prepreg sheets for cutting. By
using plexiglass or acrylic templates, the manufacturer could cut more precise plies. An
acrylic stencil would also be transparent which would help with alignment.
6. Improve method of releasing mold:
The mold release agent used successfully worked on the top half of the canister,
but the bottom half proved very difficult to remove without a lip to grab onto with our
prototype canister. An improved mold release method could be achieved with better draft
angle, mold geometry, or release agent.

42

6 Design Development
6.1 Overview
This section will discuss the methods deployed during the process of selecting the final
design of the Bear Minimum project. The process started with the ideation phase where any
possible solutions were conceived. Concept models were then completed to see physically how
certain functions would work. The models were also constructed to do some simple prototyping
of possible designs. To narrow down the number of possible designs, a Go/No-Go assessment
paired with the Pugh matrix process was completed resulting in a narrowed down list of which
ideas could be successful or what ideas to eliminate before further evaluation. For ideas that
passed the Go/No-Go assessment of the Pugh matrices, sketches were created and are in
Appendix D. Reference the sketches when the functions of the possible designs are unclear. A
decision matrix process was then conducted to narrow down the possible ideas to one design for
a middle opening canister, and one design for a top opening canister. Each selected design
showed potential to provide an adequate solution to the problem. CAD models were constructed
for these two designs and then were prototyped with wood, metal, and rapid prototyping
methods. Hand calculations analyzing the two designs under load cases representative of the
drop tests were completed to verify the strength characteristics of the possible designs. The
strength analysis paired with the prototyping allowed for a mostly comprehensive evaluation to
select a final design.

6.2 Ideation Process
The ideation process was launched using different techniques and strategies to think of
creative solutions. Each strategy was geared towards generating ideas for a single function of the
bear canister. Three functions were defined for the Bear Minimum canister lid: propagating
loads, attaching to the canister body, and locking into the canister body. Three brainstorming
session were held to generate as many ideas for each function as possible. Within the
propagating loads function, ideas fell under two main categories: core materials and corrugation
geometry. Over twenty ideas were generated for each function. The ideation process did not have
any limitations, therefore ideas as unrealistic as a magnetic lid, or inception corrugation:
corrugation within corrugation arose, still leaving a multitude of good ideas. After the ideation
process, a simple Go/No-Go process, based on intuition, and Pugh matrix scores, was conducted
to filter out the unrealistic ideas. However, aspects of these unrealistic ideas led to some
improvements on other possible designs which were then evaluated further.

43

6.3 Concept Modeling
Selected ideas pertaining to a certain function of the bear canister were modeled with
foam board and other craft supplies. Often, a new idea consists of a general plan of what it will
look like and how it will behave. However, until it is modeled with materials or a CAD program,
a mental void exists between the big idea and the details. The purpose of the concept modeling
exercise was to physically show how certain ideas will function - a proof of the concept. Out of
the three functions defined during the ideation process, only the attaching to the canister body
and locking into the canister body functions were modeled. The propagating loads function was
not modeled during this exercise because the only ideas generated for this function pertained to
either (1) a core material which would be ordered from a third party manufacturer, or (2) a
corrugated geometry, or pattern, which can be sketched very easily (e.g. a square corrugation
pattern, or a trapezoidal corrugation pattern). Pictures were taken during the exercise and are
shown in Figures 9-12.

Figures 9-12. Concept modeling prototypes are shown for (from upper left, going
clockwise) a buckle crown, peg and channel, sliding spring loaded
leaflets, and rotating spring loaded fingers attachment-locking
mechanisms.
44

6.3.1 Overview
The purpose of the Pugh matrix process was to provide a preliminary evaluation of all
possible designs which were generated from the ideation process and/or the concept modeling
stage. Weighting of each criterion is not considered; therefore, the approach only reveals rough
results. Four different Pugh matrices were evaluated during this process. They were adapted
from the categories observed during the ideation process: core materials, corrugation geometry,
opening location, attachment mechanism, and locking mechanism. The criteria by which each
design was evaluated, was developed from the customer requirements and the design
specifications. Depending on the Pugh matrix, only some of these criteria were relevant.
Once the matrices were outlined, each team member evaluated all possible designs within
each Pugh matrix. The evaluation was a crude approach assigning a (+), (-), or (0) to each
criterion compared to the baseline design for each alternative design. The baseline design was
assigned zeros in each criterion. Evaluations for each team member were compared to create
final Pugh matrices. Each design consideration was then evaluated using the Go/No-Go
approach, and by comparing the sums of each design. The results, along with each Pugh matrix,
are shown in the corresponding sections below. The Pugh matrices also allowed more idea
generation for new designs. For example, poor scoring designs that scored well in a certain
design criterion were observed, and in some cases, included in a well scoring design with a poor
score in that same design criterion. A reevaluation of design criteria for poor scoring designs also
took place to generate new ideas. Advantageous characteristics of one design were combined
with advantageous characteristics of another to make a new design. All of these were strategies
to execute an effective evaluation process.

6.3.2 Core Materials
The scope of the bear minimum project requires the lid to be a structural element. Plies of
carbon fiber alone will provide strength in the principal 2D plane, but no structural strength in
the normal “out-of-plane” direction. It may necessary to include a core material to be
sandwiched in with the carbon fiber plies. Table 6 below highlights potential materials for the
canister lid which were investigated. They include materials such as honeycomb, foam, wood,
and other fibers.

45

From the composite cores, it was clear that the foam cores fared well because they are
cheap, easily shapeable, and provide equal strength and stiffness in all directions (anisotropicity).
Carbon short fibers performed better than honeycomb due to its superior bonding strength to
carbon and its ease of implementation. Lastly, Syncore, an incredibly thin core material,
preformed the best due to its lightweight and easy “peel and stick” implementation.

6.3.3 Corrugate Geometry
The core material added to the lid part needs to maximize “out of plane” strength and
stiffness while maintaining the lowest weight possible. Simple repeating corrugate geometry is a
simple way of increasing the moment of inertia of the composite sandwich. Various corrugate
styles are listed in Table 7 with the traditional honeycomb (hexagonal) pattern being the clear
winner. Trapezoidal cross sections also scored highly because trapezoids have a large base area
to propagate the load and Divinycell foam can even be purchased in this geometry.
Table 7. The Pugh matrix evaluating corrugate geometry for lid composite
sandwiches is shown. A Go/No-Go evaluation was then completed.

The square checkerboard is an alternative square pattern that would be woven in two
directions forming a checkerboard of peaks and valleys. The checkerboard, while performing
low, may be potentially the strongest option if feasible. The checkerboard, along with four other
corrugate patterns will be investigated later for strength, weight and viability.

46

6.3.4 Opening Location
A standard lid-opening (top) canister and a canister splitting in the middle to open were
evaluated in the Pugh matrix in Table 8.
Table 8. The two possible opening locations, top and middle, were evaluated
against relevant design criteria using the Pugh matrix process. The
Go/No-Go evaluation is shown below.

Due to the rough number estimates of the Pugh matrix, both ideas were assigned a “GO”.
Both opening locations were further evaluated in a more comprehensive decision matrix.

6.3.5 Attachment-Locking Mechanism
The attachment mechanism and locking mechanism categories were combined to form
one Pugh matrix due to the dependent relationship between the two. For example, a threaded
attachment mechanism cannot be paired with rotating, spring-loaded leaflets. This is because the
leaflets would not have a lip to engage with (see attachment D for sketches of each attachment
and locking mechanism). In the Table 9 Pugh matrix below three attachment mechanisms were
considered: flush, threaded, and buckle crown. Within these attachment mechanisms, various
locking mechanisms were considered - all generated during the ideation phase.

47

The cutoff score for this Pugh matrix was -1. This left us with six possible
attachment-locking mechanisms to be evaluated in a decision matrix.

6.4 Weighted Decision Matrix Process
6.4.1 Overview
Generating weighted decision matrices is the second round of “controlled convergence”
of our potential ideas. The concepts which received a “GO” status from the pugh matrices were
used in the decision matrices. The weighted decision matrices help us to refine the potential
solutions by increasing the depth and criteria used to evaluate the concepts.
Similar to the Pugh matrices, the format of decision matrices is the same. Each concept is
given a score for each criteria. However, each criteria was assigned a weight factor that the team
deemed appropriate for the criteria. For example, having a high strength was weighted much
higher than availability of the material. Each concept graded was given a score for each criteria.
This criteria score was then multiplied by the criteria weight factor to get a total weighted score.
The sum of the weighted criteria scores gave was the final score for the concept. This final
score, although having no units or apparent scale, shows how concepts fare relative to each other.

6.4.2 Core Materials
Using the concepts that passed the pugh matrices Go/No-Go rating the core materials
were analyzed more in depth. The areas of weight and strength were weighted to be the most
important categories. The results below in Table 10 show that similar to the pugh matrices the
carbon short fiber, and Divinycell foam core performed well, while syncore performed the best
with score of 56, respectively. Syncore was the clear winner due to its small size and weight,
ease of implementation and highly available, however it should be mentioned that based on
application or geometry other materials should still be considered for areas under high shear or
normal stress. For example, honeycomb is excellent in normal stress whereas kevlar is excellent
in shear. The lid will generally be more in normal stress, while the middle seam might be more in
shear stress.

48

6.4.3 Corrugate Geometry
Core materials provide baseline material strength, but corrugate geometry will provide
thickness, increase moment of inertia, and reduce weight by taking out unused core material. The
most common corrugate types were analyzed based on their basic cross section shape such as a
square, circle, triangle, trapezoid, and hexagon. The winning shape, a hexagonal pattern, is
common in honeycomb paneling. A repeating trapezoidal pattern also scored highly as it has a
large base to propagate the load to the bottom supporting material. The square corrugate material
scored the lowest due to its complex manufacturing and unavailability. The score breakdowns
can be seen in Table 11 below.
Table 11. A final decision matrix was completed for the corrugated geometry.

6.4.4 Opening Location
The only two opening locations considered were a top opening and a middle opening. For
the middle opening canister, the entire canister body would split in the middle, therefore
exposing the inside of the canister. It is important to note that not all top opening canisters or
middle opening canisters will exhibit the same characteristics with respect to the criteria in the
decision matrix seen in Table 12. However, this gives a general comparison between the two.

49

Table 12. Ideas for the opening location are evaluated using a decision matrix.
The strength, manufacturing feasibility, and weight were the most
important criteria for the opening location.

The middle opening canister scored better than the top opening canister. The main reason
was due to the strength evaluation. The middle opening canister was assumed to exhibit a
stronger response to the loads the canister will experience in the drop tests due to the lack of a
stress concentration area near the lid opening. This stress concentration area was the reason why
last year’s senior project canister failed. Because there is more subjectivity in this decision
matrix than the others that were evaluated, a conclusion based on the score alone could not be
made. It should be noted that the final evaluation will not completely eliminate a design based on
the opening location.

6.4.5 Attachment-Locking Mechanism
The attachment-locking mechanisms were split up into two groups: mechanisms that
would work with a top opening canister, and mechanisms that would work with a middle
opening canister. Note that some attachment-locking mechanisms could fall under both groups.
All but one of the evaluated ideas were ideas generated from the ideation phase. The Flush Fit,
Internal Ring Pressure Tabs with Channels for a middle opening canister was thought of after the
Pugh matrix process by combining advantageous characteristics from two other ideas. This idea
utilizes the ring pressure tabs along with a female channel system. The decision matrix is seen in
Table 13 has conditional formatting applied to the total weighted scores for a color
representation of the scoring with green being the highest scoring. Sketches of each design were
created for clarity of how the design works and are shown in Appendix C.

50

Coincidentally, the overall highest scoring attachment-locking mechanism was the idea
generated after the Pugh matrix process. From the decision matrix results, the Flush Fit, Internal
Ring Pressure Tabs with Channels for a middle opening canister scored the best in the middle
opening group. The Flush Fit, Quarter-Turn Button (e.g. Garcia Model) for a top opening
canister scored the best in the top opening canister group. After discussion about the evaluation
process up to this point, these ideas were decided to be the two final attachment-locking
mechanism designs which then went through an engineering assessment process.

6.5 Final Selected Designs
6.5.1 Overview
A final selected design was chosen for the two opening locations considered (top and
middle of the canister body). Because having the opening location in the middle is a deviation
from the design of typical bear canisters, comparing middle opening designs directly to top
opening designs was not desirable to pick one final design. To arrive at the two final selected
designs, the decision matrix results were observed and discussed. The highest scores for each
opening location were taken for the final selected designs. This did not necessarily have to be the
criteria as intuition played a factor when selecting the designs as well. Because both team
members also agreed that the two winning designs made sense intuitively, the designs were
confirmed. The final two designs were assessed according to a variety of engineering criteria.
Sections 6.5.2 and 6.5.3 discuss this process in detail for each final design.

6.5.2 Engineering Assessment: Top Opening Design
6.5.2.1 Overview
The selected design for the top opening canister is the simplistic quarter turn button
latching mechanism similar to the Garcia canister. The quarter turn scored the highest on our
decision matrix with a score of 52, four points higher than the second place design at 48. The
canister design excelled due to its simplistic design, ease of manufacturing, low cost, and flush
top made with a stiffening core material. The canister lacked in areas such as ease of opening due
to the button needing a tool to open it. The canister design also scored just average in strength
and bear resistance due the the high reliance on the two quarter turn button tabs. The other
concern is that the strengthened lid may not structurally help the side loading case deflection
which was the primary failure of the 2015 canister design.

51

6.5.2.2 Geometry & CAD Modeling
The geometry of the canister lid is quite simple and involves a few layers of carbon fiber
with a honeycomb core. This composite sandwich provides good normal strength due to the
honeycomb core and the carbon sheets provide shear strength. The lid is held in place with two
metal quarter turn button pins which sit flush on the surface of the composite so that a bear
cannot grab onto them. The quarter turn buttons have a small latch tab on the bottom that
prevents the lid from falling or being pulled out. The lid and overall assembly renderings can be
seen in Figures 13 and 14 below.

Figures 13 & 14. (Left) The canister assembly with the lid installed and locked
was rendered. (Right) The canister lid rendering shows the
honeycomb core and latching tabs.
6.5.2.3 Prototyping
The bear minimum team created a prototype of the quarter turn button lid using a
composite sandwich, two pins, and two spring clips. The composite sandwich is thicker than
desired but shows the honeycomb core well. After a composite plate was cured, a 6” diameter
circle was cut out using a vertical bandsaw. Two holes were drilled in ¾” from the edge using a
½” drill bit for the pins. The top and bottom of the lid seen are seen in Figures 15 and 16. with
the pins and spring latch tabs pushed into place. The spring latch tabs were cheaper and faster
than manufacturing a solid metal tab for the latch and used just to show the tab concept and
functionality.

52

Figures 15 & 16. (Left) A trimetric view of the lid prototype shows the
preliminary button placements and protrusions. (Right) The
bottom view of lid prototype shows the latching tabs.

6.5.2.4 Load Case Analysis
The main loading cases for our bear canister are the 100 lb​f weight dropped from 1 foot
on the top of the canister and also the side of the canister. Simple hand calculations shown in
Appendix C approximate the uniform pressure exerted on the canister lid as 226 psi. The model
was created in solidworks and loaded into Abaqus for FEA analysis. The part was modeled using
the following input settings and assumptions in Table 14.
Table 14. A lot of generalizing assumptions were made during for the
preliminary FEA completed. This decreases the accuracy of the results.
Input Settings
● Material: Aluminum T6061
○ Modulus of Elasticity (E) = 10E6 psi
○ Poisson’s Ratio (v) = 0.33
● Element type: Quadratic Tetrahedral
elements with 75% Nodal Averaging
○ Element size = 0.20 inch
● Load: Uniform Vertical Pressure 226psi
● Boundary Condition: Pinned edges all
around. (U1 = U2 = U3 = 0)

Assumptions Made
●
●
●
●

Fixed statically all around, no rollers
Conservation of energy on weight drop
Isotropic material in elastic region
Elastic modulus is equal to universally
accepted value.
● Uniform pressure: weight contacts all
of lid at same time
● No buckling of core material.
● Stress concentrations ignored where
unrefined mesh cause divergence

Due to the long list of assumptions, our preliminary FEA results are of rough order of
magnitude. The numbers may be significantly off from actual deflections, but by using the same
53

conditions and materials for each model, the relative differences between the two were observed.
It should be of note that some high stresses were observed where stress concentrations occur and
diverge infinitely. These concentrations did not include fillets for these models, and thus were
not included in as the maximum stresses when calculating the factor of safety. The Von Mises
stress visualization in Figure 17 shows that stress is highest at the edges and center of the lid.

Figure 17. The Von Mises stress visualization for the lid of the top opening design
shows maximum stresses around the top outer diameter.
In addition to the Von Mises stress, deflection of the lid is also of concern. The lid cannot
deflect past the 0.25 inch deflection requirement. The material used for the FEA analysis is
aluminum which has a very high elastic modulus. This means are deflection values are not valid
for the final lid and are merely for comparison and identifying areas of high deflection. The lid is
similar to a simply supported beam and was modeled as disk that was pinned all around the edge.
The analysis determined the material would deflect around 0.05 inch, as seen in Figure 18, and
had a safety factor or 1.89 meaning the aluminum would not fail.

54

Figure 18. A deflection visualization for the lid of the top opening design shows
maximum deflections at the center of the lid.
6.5.2.5 Material Selection
The materials of choice for the composite lid are carbon fiber and a lightweight core
material. The first round will be made out of twill weave carbon fiber with a nomex honeycomb
core. The honeycomb provides vertical stiffness and the carbon provides resistance to shearing
and holds the core material in place. Lighter core materials and different geometrical patterns
will be experimented with to improve the lid, such as a trapezoid shape Divinycell or square
corrugate. The quarter turn button design will remain relatively constant with a metal pin,
however, the rotated tab material can be changed.
6.5.2.6 Manufacturing Process
A case study was performed to research and evaluate three different manufacturing
processes for the design of the finalized middle opening attachment-opening mechanism. All
manufacturing research and challenges for the middle opening design is consistent for the top
opening design. This case study is included in Appendix G.
The manufacturing process for the lid is quite simple involving only one layup needed.
The individual components will need to be prepared as necessary:
55

1. Carbon plies and core material:
The twill weave prepreg carbon and core material will be one layup with the core
material being cut and sized accordingly. The core will be cut to approximate size and
geometry and inserted into the sandwich. The materials need to be high temperature safe
for when the part is cured. After curing, a dremel will be used to remove excess carbon.
2. Metal quarter turn pins and tab:
The metal quarter turn pins will be purchased because they are inexpensive and
widely available. If the diameter is not within tolerance they can be turned on a lathe to a
specified diameter. The rotating tab which is the latch for closing the canister lid is
packaged with purchase of the pins.
6.5.2.7 Testing
The lid will be tested in accordance to our project requirement which specifies a 100 lb​f
weight be dropped from 1 foot onto the top of the canister and side of the canister. The deflection
shall not exceed 0.25” to pass the test. Other tests of interest are the composite buckling test and
tolerance gap test on the outer diameter of the lid. A buckling test would tell us how much
pressure normal to the surface would cause the core material to crush or buckle. The results can
be used to modify the core material or thickness. The side tolerance gap test would involve
applying a varied load to the outer edge using an instron or other compression machine. The
deflection would then be monitored until the sample reaches its yield strength and is outside of
the elastic regime. The point of maximum elastic deformation governs the manufacturing
tolerance needed on the outer radius of the composite lid.
6.5.2.8 Cost Estimate
A preliminary cost estimate for this design was conducted to compare it to the cost for the
middle opening design. The part costs are shown in Table 15.
Table 15. A rough cost estimate is shown for each part of the selected top opening
design.

56

The cost for each part will depend on a variety of things including the manufacturing
process, the materials, and the molds (if necessary). If any of these change the next time the parts
are manufactured, the cost could increase or decrease. With the current intended manufacturing
process and materials list, the only costs lie in the core. High temperature Nomex honeycomb
foam board was used for the initial cost analysis ($20.84 for a 625 mm x 625 mm x 5 mm board)
[19]. Quarter turns were left over from last year’s project which were unused. For the
preliminary cost analysis, these stock parts were selected; therefore, the cost was zero. Excess
prepreg carbon fiber was leftover from last year’s project as well meaning the lid (excluding the
core), and both halves of the canister body was projected at $0.00.
6.5.2.9 Incomplete Concept Considerations
If the top opening design is selected, many iterations will take place to better meet
customer needs and/or specifications. Currently, the design only gives a rough idea of how it will
function, and much more attention needs to be focused on details. A list of modifications to the
current design and incomplete considerations is listed below:
1. The interface between the lid and canister body will be further analyzed. Currently, the
interface is a flush fit with the current rolled edge design of the canister body. This will
achieve the functions of attaching and locking to the canister; however, it might not
achieve the propagating loads function. Options for this interface include, but are not
limited to, an insert on the inside of the canister body which interfaces with the lid, or
giving the canister body thickness with the use of a core material. The thickness of the
body would allow the load to be transferred over a larger area. This affects the user
convenience, strength and stiffness properties, and the weight of the canister.
2. The size, shape, number, and location of the quarter turns will be investigated. Stock
quarter turns will also be selected to decrease cost. This affects the convenience for the
user, the weight, manufacturability, and the strength and stiffness characteristics.
3. If a core is selected, the type, material, size, and shape will be looked into. Two types of
cores were observed during the design development phase: standard cores, and a
corrugated core. These will be further analyzed and tested to see which one is the lightest
core which still provides adequate strength and stiffness properties. This affects the
weight, manufacturability, strength and stiffness properties, and the canister volume.
4. The tolerances for all of the mating between parts will be further analyzed. This affects
the manufacturability of each part, the aesthetics, the strength and stiffness
characteristics, and the convenience for the user.
57

5. The dimensions of the diameter and thickness of the lid will be also investigated. The
diameter has roughly been defined by the templates from last year which only allows for
a certain size lid to fit onto the top half of the canister body. However, these templates
could be modified to accommodate for different diameters. This affects the weight, and
strength and stiffness characteristics, and interior volume.
If this is the selected design moving forward, all of these considerations will be discussed
and finalized in the Critical Design Report.

6.5.3 Engineering Assessment: Middle Opening Design
6.5.3.1 Overview
From the decision matrix, the final selected design for the middle opening canister was
the flush fit, internal ring pressure tabs with channels. It features a spring loaded locking
mechanism where the hoop of the top half of the canister is compressed due to the interference of
the pressure tabs and the canister body. The top half of the canister then locks into place when
the pressure tabs extend into a cavity. This motion is restricted by a channel system which makes
the design more bear proof. The concept is in its preliminary stages, so many features,
dimensions, and geometries can, and most likely will, be revisited.
6.5.3.2 Geometry & CAD Modeling
The middle opening design was modeled in SolidWorks to gain a good visual
representation of the functions and characteristics of how the canister will operate. The layout
drawing, showing an exploded view of the components of the canister assembly, can be seen in
Appendix K. The canister assembly consists of five parts: the two halves of the carbon fiber
canister body, the male and female parts of the internal attachment ring, and the retaining plate.
The two halves of the canister body use the design of the bottom half from last year’s senior
project, twice. The design for this year’s project is in the internal attachment ring. A SolidWorks
rendering showing the male and female parts of the internal attachment ring are shown in Figure
19.

58

Figure 19. A rendering of the middle opening selected design is shown. Note that
the retaining plate is the bottom in this view to see the interface. When
closing the canister, the configuration will be flipped.
The male part of the internal attachment ring will be on the inside of the bottom half of
the canister body. It will be attached so that the top surface of the larger diameter section will be
flush with the top surface of the bottom half of the canister body, leaving the smaller diameter
section with the pressure tabs protruding up above the canister body.
6.5.3.3 Prototyping
Rapid prototyping was completed for the two internal rings. The 3D printed parts were
post processed to achieve clearance between the male and female rings. They are shown in
Figures 20 and 21. The notches were over sanded to where no interference between the channel
and the notch existed. For the notches to snap into the cavities, interference has to exist between
the notches and cavities. This will be featured in future prototypes. The proof of concept for the
attachment and locking mechanism was achieved, which was the main goal for the prototypes.
59

Figures 20 & 21. (Left) Sections of 3D printed prototype attached and locked.
(Right) Close up view of the slot latching mechanism.
6.5.3.4 Load Case Analysis
Similar to the top opening canister design, the middle opening canister ring was analyzed
in Abaqus. The boundary conditions, loads, program settings, and material were all held
constant. This allows the two designs to be relatively compared for strength and deflection. The
deflection visualization in Figure 22 for the 100 lb​f load case shows the middle opening design
having relatively even stress distribution in the ring with the exception of a stress concentration
at the 90° lip. This lip has infinite stress because there is no fillet in the corner. The more even
stress distribution may prove advantageous because composite fibers won’t need to be aligned in
the loaded direction, thus allowing the same material to be used throughout the entire part.

Figure 22. Von Mises stress visualization is shown for an analogous middle
aluminum ring.
60

The middle opening design also showed a similar magnitude of deflection at around 0.05
inches. Figure 23 shows the deflection being the lowest at the fixed base and increasing as you
move further up the ring.

Figure 23. Deflection visualization for an analogous middle aluminum ring shows
the largest deflections along the upper edge of the ring for a load in the
critical direction.
A summary of the results for both FEA models can be seen in Table 16 which compares
the normalized deflection, stress, and factor of safety for each model.
Table 16. Summary of FEA Results for the middle and top opening designs.
Criteria

Top Opening

Middle Opening

Normalized Maximum Deflection in Critical Direction [in]

1.12

1.00

Max von Mises Stress [psi]

16,911

9,889

Factor of Safety [-]

1.89

3.23

Model Degrees of Freedom [-]

273,012

237,963

61

The deflection of both models was comparable, with the side opening deflecting 12%
less. The side opening also boasted a lower maximum stress and a corresponding higher factor of
safety. Both models were analyzed using a similar number of degrees of freedom ensuring that
one result was not significantly more accurate in computation.
6.5.3.5 Material Selection
Twill weave carbon fiber prepreg will be used for the first round makes of all parts. This
is because the material is left over from last years project. The prepreg carbon fiber was
determined to be an adequate solution to meet the strength and weight specifications during last
years project. Some parts for this design might have too sharp of contours to capture with the
prepreg carbon fiber. If this is the case, alternative materials such as Ultem resin, short fiber
composites, or plastic materials may be considered.
6.5.3.6 Manufacturing Process
A case study was performed to research and evaluate three different manufacturing
processes for the design of the finalized middle opening attachment-opening mechanism. The
above section summarizes the case study. This case study is included in Appendix G.
The initial manufacturing process for each part of the middle opening design is listed
below. As of right now, all materials will be carbon fiber prepreg. Achieving a well
manufactured part with carbon fiber typically takes many trials. This is because a lot things can
go wrong during this process. This plan sets out an initial manufacturing process. Depending on
how the process goes, changes will most likely occur to ensure a more effective, reliable, and
repeatable process.
1. Canister body:
One of the required canister body halves has already been made (described in
Section 5). The other half of the canister body would need to be made; however, the
process is already known.
2. Retaining plate:
The retaining plate will be a two ply layup of the prepreg carbon fiber. Two plies
will allow for a lightweight part that will still be rigid when food is on it. The retaining
plate will be manufactured with a vacuum bag lay up process.
3. Male internal attachment ring:
A negative foam mold of the part without the pressure tabs will be created using
the ShopBot. A positive plaster mold will then be made from the foam molds. The final
negative carbon fiber molds will be made by laying up prepreg carbon fiber around the
62

plaster mold. The part will then be laid up in the carbon fiber mold using a bladder
molding manufacturing process. The pressure tabs will be simultaneously laid up using a
vacuum bag manufacturing process. After curing, the two pressure tabs will be post
bonded to the male internal attachment ring. The amount of plies is unknown at this
point. This will determine the thickness and weight of the part.
4. Female internal attachment ring:
The same mold used for the male internal attachment ring will be used. The
smaller diameter section will be filled in with either a metal or carbon fiber filler part
exposing just the larger diameter section. The part will be laid up in this filled-in mold
using a bladder mold manufacturing process. After curing, the channel and cavity will be
cut out of the carbon fiber. The amount of plies is unknown at this point. This will
determine the thickness and weight of the part.
6.5.3.7 Testing
Because there is no lid in this design, separate lid testing does not need to take place.
Non-destructive testing and acid digestion testing are tentatively planned to be conducted to
determine the void fractions and weave distortions in each part. The main stage of the testing
phase will be the drop tests the SIBBG used to administer. A 100 lbf weight will be dropped on
the side of the canister and on the top of the canister. If the canister does not deflect over 0.25 in
and does not fail at any section, the canister passes. The last phase of the testing process is live
bear testing. If the canister does not fail within one hour of contact with the bear, the canister
passes and gets the certification.
6.5.3.8 Cost Estimate
A preliminary cost estimate for this design was conducted to compare it to the cost for the
top opening design. The part cost breakdown is shown in Table 17.
Table 17. A rough cost estimate is shown for each part of the selected middle
opening design.

63

The cost for each part will depend on a variety of things including the manufacturing
process, the materials, and the molds (if necessary). If any of these change the next time the parts
are manufactured, the cost could increase or decrease. With the current intended manufacturing
process and materials list, the only costs lie in the internal attachment rings, specifically the cost
to make the mold. High density foam board will be necessary for the foam molds ($98.95 for a
4" x 24" x 82" board) [23], and plaster ($45.57 for a pint) [24] will be necessary for the plaster
molds. Because the female internal attachment ring will utilize the same mold, this cost is
included in these material costs. Excess foam and plaster might be left over from last year
making the total cost zero. All materials used will be prepreg carbon fiber left over from last
year’s senior project. This is why the material cost for the attachment rings and the total cost for
the canister body and the retaining plate will be zero.
6.5.3.9 Incomplete Concept Considerations
If this design is selected, many iterations of the design will take place to better meet
customer needs and/or specifications. The current design does not take into consideration a lot of
important design features. A list of modifications to the current design and incomplete
considerations is listed below:
1. The orientation of the male and female internal attachment ring parts will be looked into.
This means, what are the benefits and drawbacks of having the female part attached to the
lower half and the male part attached to the upper half of the canister body and vice
versa. This affects the interface with the retaining plate, and the convenience for the user.
2. The size and shape of the pressure tabs will be looked into. A possible shape might be
comparable to the pressure tabs on the BearVault canister: a sawtooth shape. This affects
the convenience for the user, the weight, and the strength and stiffness characteristics.
3. The size and shape of the channel will be looked into. This affects the convenience for
the user, and possibly the strength and stiffness characteristics, and the weight.
4. The tolerances for all of the mating between parts will be looked into. This affects the
manufacturability of each part, the aesthetics, the strength and stiffness characteristics,
and the convenience for the user.
5. The dimensions of the male and female internal attachment ring parts, and the retaining
plate part will be looked into. This affects the weight, and strength and stiffness
characteristics, and internal volume.
64

6. The interface of the retaining plate with the male or female internal attachment ring part
will be looked into. This affects the weight, user convenience, and possibly the strength
and stiffness characteristics.
7. The shape of the male and female internal attachment ring parts will be looked into. The
parts have to be circular from the top view in order to fit into the canister body. One such
possibility is to section the internal rings are where the channels and pressure tabs will be.
If this is the selected design moving forward, all of these considerations will be discussed
and finalized in the Critical Design Report.

6.5.4 Conclusion
After the engineering assessment, the middle opening design is preferred by both team
members. Both designs passed the proof of concept for two of the three functions defined in the
ideation phase: attaching and locking to the canister body. These functions were verified after the
prototypes were constructed. Preliminary FEA was completed to verify the third function of
propagating loads. With the FEA, the middle opening design compared to the top opening design
showed a factor of safety of approximately 1.8 times greater. The middle opening design also
showed deflections in the critical direction of approximately 1.1 times less than the top opening
design. As this was discussed before, it is important to restate that the assumptions and input
settings for the FEA were not fully inclusive with respect to the canister’s material properties,
geometries, and loading cases. The results from the FEA represent a crude representation of the
canister’s response.
Along with the verifying and comparing the three functions for both designs, qualitative
factors of the designs were also taken into consideration. One such factor was user convenience.
Early concerns for the middle opening canister suggested the opening and closing of the canister
would be an issue for the user. With the addition of the retaining plate, the design became more
convenient for the user. Also, a valid argument was brought up stating the middle design would
be more convenient than the top opening design. If small food items fall through the canister to
the bottom of the canister when hiking, the entire canister has to be emptied to reach them. For
the middle opening design, the two halfs are compartmentalized meaning that only half the
canister would have to be emptied to reach the food item. Also, having a compartmentalized
canister gives the user the option for a more strategic method of packing food items.
With everything being considered, Nick Hellewell and the team members for this year’s
Bear Minimum project have selected the final design for the attachment and locking mechanism
to be the middle opening, flush fit, channeled, internal ring pressure tab system.
65

7 Final Design Details
7.1 Introduction
Once the middle opening, flush fit, channeled, internal ring pressure tab system was
selected, a more focused and detailed process was conducted to determine the specifics of the
design. This included, but was not limited to, things such as the size and shape of part features,
tolerances between fittings, manufacturing processes, material selections, cost analysis, and
safety considerations.
During the course of writing this report, a test was carried out to investigate the deflection
and the ultimate compressive strength for the half canister body. After analyzing the test results,
a large change was made to the design. The half canister body failed at 439 lbs while being
deflected by 1.71 in. Figure 24 shows the resulting deflection from the load near failure.

Figure 24. The canister half is shown near ultimate compressive loading. The
deflection at failure was 1.71 in.
The compressive strength from the test was more than sufficient to pass the drop test.
However, the large deflection observed would eventually lead to an entirely new design of the
ring(s). The previous design was reliant of the canister halves to maintain the load while the
66

rings were merely for alignment. From the instron testing it was determined that the middle ring
must be able to stiffen the canister and take a portion of the canister in order to meet our force
and deflection requirements. Section 7.2 will describe the new design in detail.

7.2 Design Description
7.2.1 Physical Features
7.2.1.1 Canister Body
The canister body will be have the same geometry as the canister body that last year’s
team designed. Similarly to the other middle opening designs the canister body will consist of
two canister bottoms. Therefore, the mold for the bottom half of the canister will be the only
necessary mold for manufacturing the two halves. One canister half will then get three ⅛” inch
holes drilled through the rim spaced 120° from one another and ¼” down from the canister edge.
The drilled holes are for the locking mechanism.
7.2.1.2 Stiffening Ring Assembly
As discussed in the introduction, a major design change was made to the interior rings.
The previous idea of having two rings internal to the canister was rethought and developed into a
new idea: having one ring which provides more stiffness to both canister halves at the exposed
edges. This part will now be referred to as the stiffening ring for the remainder of the report. The
stiffening ring is a single ring which joins the two canister halves together with two tongue and
groove interfaces spanning the entire rim of the canister. The edges of the two half canister
bodies will act as the tongues, and the stiffening ring will consist of the two grooves opposing
one another. Figure 25 shows a dimetric section view of the double groove interface featured on
the stiffening ring.

67

Figure 25. A dimetric view of the cross section reveals the double groove featured
on the stiffening ring.
The stiffening ring will have a total of three holes drilled into it post cure. They will be
⅛” through holes evenly spaced 120°. These three holes line up with the three holes drilled into
one of the canister halves mentioned above. Three 18-8 stainless steel knurled head thumb bolts
will go through the drilled holes and will fasten to three low profile steel square nuts bonded to
the inside of the stiffening ring. The bolt heads will be able to twist off by hand. In total, the
bolts will fasten the two walls of the groove and the edge of the half canister body in between the
walls. The stiffening ring will be permanently post bonded to the half canister without the drilled
holes.
Another important feature is the elastic net. To deal with the problem of food spilling
when closing the canister after packing it, an elastic net will be attached with six velcro strips
near. The net will catch the food items not allowing them to spill out. Because the velcro strips
are attached to the inner surface of the stiffening ring, the half canister with the stiffening ring
bonded to it will be the half that the user flips upside down when attaching and locking the
assembly. An exploded isometric model of the stiffening ring assembly along with the edges of
the canister rims is shown in Figure 26.

68

Figure 26. The stiffening ring assembly is shown with a section view revealing
the attachment mechanism. Note: Reciprocating velcro strips not
shown in view

7.2.2 Material Selection
The Bear Minimum canister aims to be the market’s first fully composite canister. The
new tongue and groove center stiffening ring will be made of composite allowing the entire
canister to be lighter and elastic in nature. The canister can be broken into three main portions for
material selection: the body, stiffening ring, and mold.
7.2.2.1 Canister Body
The Bear Minimum team explored two methods of creating the composite canister body
using a carbon tooling mold. One method involved pre-preg composite laminate and the other
was using a simple wet hand layup as noted in Figure 27.

69

The wet layup method was easy and simple to execute, but the quality of the part created
was inferior to the prepreg part. The prepreg composite maintained a more even wall thickness of
0.055” with a circularity of 0.090” unlike the wet layup which had areas of overlapping layers or
less than four layers of carbon. The more even wall thickness of the prepreg carbon allows for a
higher strength and easier implementation with a stiffening ring groove.
The wet layup canister maintained a superior surface finish and lower weight due to
excess resin being expelled into the fleece layer. Although the reduced weight is significant, the
resin distribution of the wet layup is not as even as with prepreg. The prepreg thus, maintains a
constant surface finish and look, even if it is not polished as the wet layup.
The team ultimately choose prepreg as the composite material of choice due to the ease
of manufacturing and more repeatable results. Results from a decision matrix are shown in Table
18. Previously manufactured wet canister layups were more difficult to remove from the mold,
causing permanent damage to the canisters upon removal.
Table 18. Decision matrix determining prepreg carbon fiber as the selected
manufacturing material for the bear canister

7.2.2.2 Stiffening Ring
Original design attempts to make the stiffening ring out of an injection molded plastic or
short fiber composite were investigated; however, a prepreg carbon part was desirable. The
tongue and groove stiffening ring can be made out of 18 layers of composite prepreg. Each
composite layer is approximately 0.015” thick and can be shaped before being placed in the oven
for curing. Prepreg carbon allows us to more accurately place the layers.
70

7.2.2.3 Mold and Canister Assembly
The stiffening ring grooves will be made using an aluminum three piece mold. The molds
ring can be machined using CNC methods or by hand with a hand router [25].

7.2.3 Design Specific Safety Considerations
The safety hazard identification checklist identifies potential hazards pertinent to the Bear
Minimum project. This list can be seen in Section 4.4 of this document under the Management
Plan.
Our tongue and groove stiffening ring design maintains the same canister body as the
previous design, but the material is changed from a polymer back to a composite laminate. The
composite is similar to the body material, thus not introducing any new safety considerations for
the new material.
● Regarding sharp edges on the canister: Sharp edges will still be present on the the new
canister stiffening ring. Due to the four edges on the stiffening ring extra attention to
covering or sanding down these sharp edges will be done.
● Regarding abnormal effort or physical posture during usage: The canister design will still
be opened from the middle. The user will not be required to twist the canister to open it.
This reduces the risk of stressing the user's’ back muscles.
● Regarding environmental conditions such as humidity, cold & hot temperatures: The
canister material is consistent and the container will only maintain 1-2% moisture.
Allowing the canister to be homogenous throughout will reduce stress due to thermal
expansion as the ring will expand with the canister halves. The tongue and groove will
allow for slight ventilation in the case of pressurization.
● Regarding use in an unsafe manner: The canister can still be used unsafely and should be
kept out of reach of small children. The exposed edges of the stiffening ring are also
slightly sharp and caution should be used when handling. The bear minimum team does
not recommend using the canister has a stool.
● Regarding other potential hazards: The canister body is still made of carbon fiber which
can pose health hazards if the dust is exposed to the user. There are no additional other
potential hazards from the new stiffening ring design.

71

7.2.4 Maintenance and Repairs
7.2.4.1 Maintenance
Maintenance of the canister body will be minimal to unnecessary. One disadvantage to
composite parts is they experience wear over time. The bolts and nuts used to hold the canister
together will not wear down as they are tougher than the canister walls. The user may need to
monitor any surface finishes or internal sealant layers applied to the canister. These layers are
used to improve the aesthetic appearance of the canister and prevent carbon dust from interacting
with the canister contents.
7.2.4.2 Repairs
Composite laminates are very difficult and expensive to repair. In the unlikely case that
the canister wall is punctured, cracked, or inoperable the user must either have the canister
repaired or replaced. In the case of stiffening ring failure, the complex geometry would require a
replacement part to be needed. For the canister halves, A post bond repair patch can be used to
repair the crack or hole and strength the surrounding material. The repaired canister will not be
of equal strength, but it will be usable. Instron testing has shown that the canister halves maintain
up to approximately 85% of the original canister strength even with small cracks propagating
from the edges.

7.3 Justification
7.3.1 Analysis Results
7.3.1.1 Hand Calculation Results
Because the canister separates in the middle, the most critical load case analyzed was a
purely compressive load acting on the hoop of the canister in the middle. This is the load case is
representative of the 100 lb drop test on the side of the canister. To model this, an equivalent
static load to the impact load of 100 lb from 1 ft was calculated. This calculation involved
work/energy and impact/momentum calculations. The velocity of the weight just before impact
came out to be 8.02 ft/s. (Appendix B) The desired impact force depended on the time duration
of the impact. From the drop test of last year’s project, using the frames taken from the high
speed camera, this time duration was approximately 0.1 s. This impact from last year’s test is
shown in Figure 28.

72

Figure 28. Side deflection is shown before and after the impact of approximately 0.1 s.
Appendix B shows the sample hand calculation for finding the impact force for a time of
0.1s. Because the design of this year’s canister is very different than last year’s design, this value
for the impact time can only be used as a rough guideline. In Excel, impact time was plotted as
an independent variable to find a range of impact forces the canister might experience. The plot
is shown in Figure 29 below.

Figure 29. At the observed impact time of .1s from last year’s project, the
corresponding impact force is 249.1 lb.
73

At impact times lower than .025s, the relationship is severe. For this reason, the design
should try to prolong the impact time. A future iteration could feature a three ply canister and
stiffening ring to give the carbon less stiffness.
From these results, the stiffening ring was sized appropriately. At an impact time of
0.10s, using the impact time approximated from last year’s impact test results, an impact force of
249.1 lb was computed using the curve of Figure 29. From the FEA analysis discussed above, a
stiffening ring sized at 1.5 inches tall and the cross sectional dimensions shown in Figure 30, the
part can support a compressive force of 371 lb which passes the 249.1 lb required load, yielding
a factor of safety of 1.49 respectively.

Figure 30. Finalized Stiffening Ring Cross Section Dimensions
The finalized cross sectional dimensions were selected from impact/momentum analysis
and using multiples of 0.015 inches (thickness of a carbon ply). Making this multiples of 0.015
inches is due to manufacturing reasons discussed in section 8.2 of this report.
The reason why a smaller impact time was not used or a factor of safety was not applied
to the calculations to be more conservative was because this calculation isolates the stiffening
ring from the rest of the assembly and tests its compressive strength. That means that no load is
transferred through the rings into the half canister bodies. This makes this analysis inherently
conservative due the the fact that the stiffening ring will transfer loads very effectively due the
continuous contact with the canister edges around the rims.

74

7.3.1.2 FEA Analysis
7.3.1.2.1 Stiffening Ring

Because finite element analysis had previously been performed on the bear canister
halves and previous internal rings, it was not needed to perform FEA on those components again.
Due to the new stiffening ring design, it was essential to validate the mechanical response. Thus,
only the ring needed to be modeled to see how much of the 249 lb dynamic load it can handle
(calculated from the impact analysis performed). The force on the model was 249 lb in the
compressive direction (-U2 for top loading, +/-U1 or +/-U3 for side loading).
Below is a summary of the the FEA inputs used for the model in ABAQUS:
● Loading: 248 lbs. (-U2 for top loading, +/-U1 or +/-U3 for side loading
● BC: Fixed on stiffener side wall for side loading, fixed on stiffener center bottom for top
loading.
● Mesh: 0.22 inches seed, tetrahedral

Figure 31. FEA von mises stress plots for side loading (left) and top loading
(right). The stress safety factors of these tests were 1.80 and 1.49
respectively.

75

The FEA results in Figure 31 showed quite conclusively that the stiffening ring would not
fail under the dynamic 249 lb load from the side or top of the canister. On the side loading case it
was seen that the outer canister edge took the majority of the stress, which was in tension and the
inside in compression. Tension is advantageous for composites due to their fibers being stronger
in tension. For the top loading case it was seen that the center portion of the “H” shape was in
high compression due to the small horizontal cross sectional area. This material was in
compression which may help us align our fibers better.
Using the material specification sheet yield of 320 ksi, we can estimate the yield strength
to be 233.7 ksi (based off of the FSAE strength data of 69.7% (Appendix H)). Using this value, it
was calculated that there would be a safety factor of 1.80 for the side loading of the ring and 1.49
for the top loading of the ring. If the material was at 100% of it’s material specification sheet
then those safety factors would increase to 2.47 and 2.13, respectively.
7.3.1.2.2 Stress Concentrations Around the Drilled Holes

Stress concentrations around the holes are of concern when dealing with the top/bottom
impact load case. When the weight is dropped on the top, a portion of the load will transfer to the
pins which will load all three holes in shear. The worst case scenario, and an almost impossible
occurrence, would be if all the load was focused directly on one pin. This load case was
investigated.
From the FEA results in Appendix M performed on the half canister body, the maximum
stress around the hole was 37.1 ksi. From the specificated yield strength of the twill weave
carbon fiber of 320 ksi, the yield strength for our composite part is projected to be approximately
223.7 ksi. This is due to the 30.3% reduction of ultimate strength of prepreg carbon fiber parts
laid up using Cal Poly’s resources (Appendix H). Dividing the expected yield strength by the
FEA results yields a maximum stress concentration factor of 6.03. A stress concentration factor
of approximately 12 [26] can be expected for high modulus carbon/epoxy uniaxial composites.
This number will be used as a rough guideline. This is because our carbon fiber is not uniaxial, it
is a woven fabric meaning that the strength in the transverse direction is the same as the
longitudinal direction. Because of these considerations, the stress concentrations around the
drilled holes are considered to pass the engineering analysis.

7.3.2 Testing Results
Although the stiffening ring is designed to take the majority of external impact forces, it
is important that the canister body contributes to taking a portion of the load. During the drop
test, a 100 lb weight is to be dropped from one foot onto the side and top of the canister. The
load absorbed by the stiffening ring will be the total dynamic force minus twice to load
76

supported by the canister halves. From this logic, it is essential we determine the load the
canister halves can support to effectively size our stiffening ring.
An instron machine was the preferred method of choice for testing to produce a
load-deflection curve of the canister half. The instron can easily provide the loads we needed and
measure deflection up to the 0.0001” of an inch. In order to mount the canister to the instron we
created a simple wooden jig that supported the canister and allowed the jig to attach to two
aluminum mounting tabs for the instron as seen in the Figure 32 below.

Figure 32. The testing jig created to test half canisters is shown. Two metal
mounts are attached to wooden two by fours providing supports for
the canisters. PVC piping allows the jig to move vertically.
The Instron machine allowed us to slowly increase the load and deflection and see the
response from the canister half. The wooden two by four lumber pieces used had 12” diameter
arc of a circle cut into them to allow the canister to be supported, but not roll out when loaded.
We set the instron settings to a load gain of 100 per volt for load, and 0.2 per volt for deflection
gain. The waveform used to modulate the canister up and down was set to -0.5 inch at a rate of
0.005 inches per second. The following results for the instron were collected and graphed in
Figure 33 and Table 19 below.

77

Figure 33. After post processing, the Instron compressive force was plotted over
measured deflections for a half canister.
Table 19. Corresponding Instron compressive forces are shown at selected
deflection values.
Instron Deflection
(in)

Half Canister
Force (lbf)

0

0

0.25

13.1

0.75

88.5

1.25

264.0

1.71

438.0

From the Instron results, we can see that although our canister is quite strong, taking a
maximum force of 440 lb before yielding, it is not very stiff. The canister deflection was around
1.7 inches at it’s yield criteria. The yielding at 1.71 inches indicated the first fiber failure. The
ultimate strength of the canister was only 1 lb greater (441 lb) at 0.05 inches farther. From that
78

point on, the canister experienced multiple successive fiber failures, even when the load stopped
increasing.
After the first run of the Instron, the canister had only minor damage done to it consisting
of a couple fibers broken and hairline fractures. The second canister run yielded a maximum
force of around 370 lb, approximately 86% of the first run. This shows that the canister is quite
resilient and will work quite well even with some fiber damage.
The new stiffening ring design takes advantage of the flexibility and high strength of
carbon fiber. The ring will be able to flex with the canister walls and not yield. In addition, more
flexibility allows the impact time to be larger, thus reducing the force caused by decelerations. In
the future we will test more stiffening ring geometries to optimize the weight and strength of the
ring. If the ring is too stiff, we can reduce composite layers. Conversely, we can add additional
composite plies or core materials to increase stiffness.
Testing was also carried out on a 3D printed prototype. The purpose of this prototype was
to get a basic proof of concept. Because the strength, weight, and stiffness of the 3D printed part
was much different than the anticipated strength, weight, and stiffness, testing the print in these
categories would not provide good justification on corresponding design decisions. The 3D
printed part shown with two half canisters is pictured in Figure 34.

Figure 34. The 3D printed prototype proved the design’s attachment function.
Note: the canister halves pictured were both manufactured as whole
canisters, then cut down with a dremel; the height of the stiffening
ring is .75 in while in the confirmation prototype, the height of the
stiffening ring will be 1.5 in.
79

Even though strength, weight, and stiffness test results using the print were not a valid
representation of the final design’s characteristics, basic observations were made in these
categories. The canister, using the printed stiffening ring, would hold a static weight of 165 lb of
compression in the longitudinal direction. This was not the ultimate static load, just the weight of
a student who was sitting on it as a stool (which is a load case we are expecting when taken
backpacking). Also, this static loading proved how well the stiffening ring does as far as the
attachment function of the design. Because the half canister’s are contacted and supported at
every point along the rim and are restricted in both directions by the grooves, the whole
assembly feels very solid. The assembly feels like one rigid part which was the intention for the
new design.
Additional design verification testing of our canister was the measurement of the canister
dimensions. Original testing plans called for calipers to be used for dimension measurement. Due
to availability of equipment and new training, it was decided a Coordinate Measuring Machine
(CMM) would be the new method of measurement for the canister. The CMM is capable of
measuring to the 1/10,000” of an inch. Using the manual touch off mode on the CMM touch
probe was used to measure diameters around the canister. Figure 35 below shows the touch off
points of the canister and their relative deviation from the nominal diameter. The image below
shows that the mold is slightly ovular shaped and bends outwards at two of the ends.

Figure 35. Touch-off points and deviation for CMM results on canister inner
diameter are shown.

80

The results from the CMM machine allow for improvement to the design of the stiffening
ring mold. The deviation in the canister mold and lip required a thicker slot in the stiffening ring.
The results from the canister CMM are shown below in Table 20, with the maximum circularity
of around 91 thousandths of an inch.
Table 20. Nominal canister diameters and circularity.

Canister Part

Measurement
(in)

Inner Diameter

8.95901

ID circularity

0.09040

OD

9.06963

OD circularity

0.08162

7.3.3 Engineering Judgement
Design decisions which weren’t able and/or necessary to have experimental, analytical,
and/or numerical justification were assessed with the team members’ engineering judgement.
One such decision was the number and locations of the drilled holes in both the half canister
body and the stiffening ring. Three holes evenly spaced 120° apart was selected. A common load
case in the hoop direction, whether it is the compression test in the Instron, the drop test of 100
lb, a bear standing on it, or being dropped on a hard surface, is two opposing forces 180°
inwards. By having two or four holes, the stress concentrations around the holes would be loaded
simultaneously leading to a higher chance of failure. By having three holes spaced evenly around
the hoop, this scenario will be avoided.
For procedure 2 of the manufacturing process (refer to Section 7.2.2), 10 layers of carbon
fiber was selected to give the half canister body ample clearance when seated in the groove.
Because the canister has curvature, a groove thickness equal to the canister wall thickness would
cause interference. From the SolidWorks model, a 0.030 inch overlay due to the curvature was
observed. This means the canister wall thickness could be thought of being 0.09 inches instead of
the actual thickness, 0.06 inches. Adding 0.03 inches of tolerance to both sides of the canister
yields a total groove thickness of 0.15 inches. This totals to 10 layers of carbon fiber thick. This
assessment of the groove thickness was then inputted into Abaqus to verify the strength response
(discussed in Section 7.3.1.1)

81

Prepreg carbon was selected as the material for many reasons. The specific strength of
carbon fiber is ideal to meet the weight and strength specifications. Because the materials for the
stiffening ring and the half canister bodies are the same, they whole canister will expand or
contract equally when exposed to hygrothermal conditions. Also, the curing cycle for both parts
will be the same, decreasing labor cost and manufacturing time. When ordering materials, only
one carbon fiber type will be necessary to order also increasing the efficiency of operations when
on a production level.

7.3.4 Feasibility and Possible Issues
The Bear Minimum canister will be the first almost completely carbon fiber canister on
the market. This poses many feasibility concerns and potential issues down the road. These
concerns range from cost all the way to the base material strength. Modern backpackers demand
more from less and the Bear Minimum canister will be pushing the envelope of the material
properties. The following are a culmination of concerns of the bear canister.
1. Composite fiber strength differing from specified values.
Composite materials are difficult to work with by nature, There are many factors
involved in the manufacturing processes such as fibers used, resin used, resin content
percentage, porosity, cure cycle and time, and human error. The material specification
sheet for our Cytec prepreg resin system list the canister having a fiber tensile strength of
320 ksi. Intuition leads us to believe our fiber strength will be considerably less than that
due to manufacturing errors and uncertainty. Without proper material data of in-house
manufacturing processes it is difficult to scale or offset our engineering calculations and
simulation to reflect these manufacturing flaws.
Fortunately data from the Cal Poly Formula SAE team was released to us
allowing us to estimate the strength of our composite canisters. The FSAE composite
samples were cured in the same composites room and autoclave as our canisters are
manufactured in using similar resin systems with a fiber volume of 62%. This allows us
to show structural similitude between the two. The Formula SAE data showed
approximately that the fiber yield strength was 223.9ksi of the 320ksi of the
manufacturer's data sheet. This yield percentage of 69.7% can be used for our models
(Attachment H). This new fiber percentage yield shows that our carbon fiber strength of
320 ksi would also yield at 223.9 ksi and the resin at 420 ksi would yield at 292.7 ksi.
The concern brought up with the carbon fiber strength is hoping that the canister
fibers aren’t strong enough and yield when in use. Ultimately, final manufacturing
82

methods will yield canisters with strength closer to 85%+ of the data sheet, but we should
manufacture for worst case conditions or if some fibers are flawed in a portion of the
canister.
2. Canister edges sticking out.
The second main concern of the stiffening ring design is the fact that the canister
has two ring edges that stick out with the the new stiffening ring design. These edges are
sharp and may either harm the user or break off. The manufacturing challenge here is to
somehow soften those edges and sharp corners to allow them not to harm the user’s
backpack or skin. One possible method of protecting these edges is to dip the edges in
wax to gain a small wax radius on the canister edges. This radius would be equal to the
composite thickness to prevent interference between the tongue and groove latching
system.
3. Thermal expansion of aluminum.
The aluminum parts needed for the stiffening ring mold are comprised of three
sheets of aluminum in which the stiffening ring will be laid up on. Since we are using
prepreg carbon fiber this requires that the aluminum mold halves be heated to 250°F to
allow for curing of the composite. Due to the thermal expansion of aluminum, the
dimension of the the middle aluminum ring used to dimension the groove of the the
stiffening ring will expand and become larger. We can mitigate this expansion by one of
two ways: 1) Decrease the aluminum ring thickness and allow it to expand into size, or 2)
decrease increase the number of carbon layers to accept the slightly wider gap. The
former being the more straightforward option because the thermal expansion of
aluminum is known. If the aluminum expansion rate is 12.3E-6 inches per degree
Rankine*1in (equivalent to a 1 degree fahrenheit change), then at 250°F the thermal
expansion of aluminum would cause it to be 0.000276 inches larger, or approximately
2% of one layer of carbon. This expansion could be considered nearly negligible since we
have much larger manufacturing tolerances to deal with.
4. Manufacturing the stiffening ring.
(See Section 7.2.2) There are ample things that could pose challenges during the
manufacturing process. One such thing challenge is tolerancing the molds appropriately.
This is very important because if the tolerancing is off, the vacuum bagging process will
not be able to supply the right pressure to bond the layers of carbon well enough to create
a structurally sound part. Another challenge will be drilling the holes. Because the bolts
83

will be going through three different surfaces, it is very important to have all three holes
line up for each holes. Because the nut is the fastening method, and not something such
as a press fit, this is not as much of a concern. Overall, if this manufacturing process is
committed to and the part does not function as designed to, the mold will be a waste of
time, money, and resources. This mold design does not allow for iterations of the
stiffening ring such as changing dimensions or the number of plies.

7.4 Supporting Data
7.4.1 Bill of Materials
The bill of materials was relatively straightforward for this project. Only eight parts are
required for the canister assembly. The full bill of materials can be seen below in Table 21. The
assembly levels start at the finished canister, the final assembly. From there, it is broken down
into its constituent parts: the half canister bodies (with and without holes), the stiffening ring
assembly, and the elastic net. The stiffening ring assembly is then further broken down into its
constituent parts: the ring itself, the nuts, velcro, and bolts.

Table 21. The total cost of materials per canister comes out to less than $92.23
considering the nuts, net, and velcro will be used for multiple
canisters.

84

7.4.2 Cost Analysis
The Bear Minimum funded by an external sponsor allowing us to have a budget of
$2,000 USD. When designing any engineering part or system it is critical to keep costs in mind.
For our project we are not as seriously concerned with pricing because the ultralightweight
backpacking market is willing to pay a premium for composite or lightweight products. Despite
the wealthy market, our sponsor has a goal of selling the canister at $500 USD for production.
In addition to this budget many materials and tools were supplied courtesy of the Cal
Poly Human Powered Vehicle team. These supplies and tools include: prepreg carbon fiber,
vinyl sheeting template material, and tools like drills, bits, and scissors. Additionally, during our
initial prepreg and wet layup testing we had to purchase bagging materials and chemicals for
both processes. Table 22 below summarizes the project costs as of 2/8/2017.
Table 22. Purchased Parts for the Bear Minimum Project are shown.
Purchased Part Costs

Supplier

Quantity

Total Cost

2x2 Twill Weave Carbon Fiber Prepreg
(Cytec 5320-1 Resin System)

ACP Composites

1

688.29*

Low Strength Steel Nut Pack 4-40 of 100

McMaster-Carr

100

$2.81

18-8 Stainless Steel Knob 4-40 3/8" Long

McMaster-Carr

3

$5.88

3D printer Nylon Roll

Amazon.com

1

$23.85

LOCTITE Frekote NC-700 Gallon

ACP Composites

Acetone 1 Gallon

Home Depot

1

$13.97

Plastic Sheeting 10'x100' 6mil

Home Depot

1

$59.98

Vinyl Sheeting for Templates

Home Depot

1

$9.98*

1

39.95*

1

$60.00

Total

$284.49

Total with Tax

$307.25

High Temp Vacuum Bag Connector Lock
Ring
ACP Composites
West Systems 105/109 Epoxy/Resin
* = Donation

The Craft, SLO

$118.00

For manufacturing of each individual canister halves and also the future stiffening ring
design the team had to purchase, or borrow many composite materials. Many of these are the
bagging materials such as the breather, bleeder, vacuum bag, and release agents. Squeegees and
85

masking tape are also needed for manufacturing of prepreg carbon fiber. With tax included,
manufacturing totals to about $93 overall as seen in the Table 23 summation below.
Table 23: Manufacturing Costs for the Bear Minimum Project are shown.
Manufacturing Costs

Supplier

Quantity

Total Cost

Yellow Vacuum Bag Sealant Tape Roll

Fibre Glast

1

$7.95

Breather Fleece - 5 Yard

Fibre Glast

1

$24.95

Polyester Peel Ply Yrd

Fibre Glast

1

$12.51

Vacuum Bag Film Strechlon 800 5yrd

Fibre Glast

1

$29.95

Squeegee

Fibre Glast

2

$1.80*

Painter's Masking Tape

Home Depot

2

$5.94

Latex Gloves 50 count

Home Depot

1

$4.47

Scissors

Home Depot

2

$11.96*

Tape Measure

Home Depot

2

$10.48*

Exacto Knife

Home Depot

2

$3.96*

Sand Paper 60 grit 9"x11"

Home Depot

1

$3.97*

20oz Carbon Fiber Tooling Fabric Mold

Fibre Glast

1

$60.45*

Hand Heat Gun

McMaster Carr

1

$31.69*

Total:

$85.77

Total with Tax

$92.63

* = Donation

The majority of the test fixture building materials were purchasable from home depot for
a minimal price of $20.55 excluding the cost of the Instron mounting plates. These plates were
provided with the Instron to assist with mounting. A summary is shown in Table 24.
Table 24: Testing Costs for the Bear Minimum Project are shown.
Testing Costs

Supplier

Quantity

Total Cost

Construction Wood 2"x4"x96"

Home Depot

1

$2.69

Drywall Screws#6 1-1/4" 1lb pack

Home Depot

1

$6.47

PVC Pipe 1.25"x10'

Home Depot

1

$5.22

Gorilla Glue 2 Part Epoxy

Home Depot

1

$4.65

Aluminum Instron Mounting Plates

McMaster Carr

2

$0.00 *

Total

$19.03

Total with Tax

$20.55

* = Donation

86

To date, the bear minimum project has been relatively inexpensive due to donated
materials and available tools and equipment. We anticipate that half our purchases have yet to be
made for this project. Eventually we will need purchase three aluminum plates for manufacturing
the stiffening ring mold from. In addition we will need materials such as the velcro seen in Table
25 below in order to hold the restraining net in place. Overall, the bear minimum project is
expected to only cost around $730 which is much below our allowed budget.
Table 25: Future Anticipated Parts for the Bear Minimum Project are shown.
Anticipated Parts

Supplier

Quantity

Total Cost

Velcro 1/2" x 5ft

McMaster-Carr

1

$6.22

Netting 1 sq yrd.

OnlineFabricStore.net

1

$5.70

Aluminum 6061 1.5" x 12" x 12"

McMaster-Carr

1

$114.58

Aluminum 6061 3/4" x 12" x 12"

McMaster-Carr

2

$159.88

Total

$286.38

Total with Tax

$309.29

Entire Project
Cost

$675.67

Entire Project
Cost + 8% Tax

$729.72

* = Donation

In the future, Nick Hellewell expects to eventually mass manufacture and sell canisters to
the general public. Additional costs needed for full scale production were considered. The first
year will include the cost of capital investments (ovens, freezer for composites, and other general
equipment). Labor, also seen in Table 26, is responsible for $280 of cost per canister. This is
based off of an average yearly salary of $36,000 for a composite technician worker.
Table 26: Capital Investments and Labor Costs for the Bear Minimum Project are shown.
Capital Investments

Cost

Walk in Composite Oven

$8,000

Drill Press

$375

Vacuum Pump System

$750

Composites Freezer

$800

Total

$9,925

Labor Cost

Cost

Composite Technician 2x 8hr @ 36k/yr

$280

87

If we are to assume that 100 canisters are made per year (yielding around $50,000
income) then the price of one canister for the first year will be around $650 USD. This high price
is due to the fact that capital investments must be paid off this first year. You can see the
difference in total cost ($43,000 vs $33,000) between year one and year two in Table 27.
Starting the second year and subsequent years, those capital investments will be paid off and the
canister can sell for $499, right at our sponsor’s goal price.
Table 27: Full Scale Production Costs for the Bear Minimum Project are shown.
100 Canisters Cost

First Year

Second Year +

Parts + Materials

$729.72

$729.72

Composite Material

$4,500

$4,500

Capital investments

$9,925

$0

Labor Cost

$28,000

$28,000

Total

$43,154.72

$33,229.72

Cost Per Canister

$431.55

$332.30

Retail Cost Per Canister
(50% Markup)

$647.32

$498.45

The Bear Minimum team strives to meet the project goals. Our current plan will allow us
to build and sell the canister for $500, manufacture a canister under 1.3lbs, and so far keeps us
under our $2,000 product budget.

7.5 Drawings
To see the complete list of drawings and detail part and assembly drawing see Appendix K.

8 Project Plan
8.1 Design Verification
8.1.1 Overview
The design verification plan (DVP) was created to establish a process to test the finalized
design. The full DVP can be seen in Appendix J. Each test was categorized as either a concept,
structural, or confirmation test based on the relative order in which they needed to be conducted.
88

For example, conducting tolerance tests on the final product would be during the confirmation
test stage while comparing shear strengths of various adhesives would be during the concept test
phase. Each test was also categorized as a user, design, manufacturing, or environmental test.
This was important because if a test fails, this category specified the source for the failure
mechanism. The future test plan, Section 8.1.2, will discuss the specifics of each test, and will go
over any foreseen problems.

8.1.2 Future Test Plan
In accordance to our design verification and testing plan we must validate our
engineering design for the canister. Although we have already used the CMM and instron
machines to test the canister additional testing must be done on future prototypes and also after
the canister is finished to verify quality and dimensions, thus, some of the remaining tests as as
follows:
1) Force-Deflection curve for the stiffening ring.
Similar to the canister deflection curve on the instron, the stiffening design we
manufacture should be tested on the instron machine to determine its strength and
flexibility. We hope to achieve larger numbers than the canister strength, but lower
numbers than the canister deflection. To conduct this test, fortunately, the testing jig from
the half canister can be reused due to it having a similar diameter.
2) Tolerance check on CMM.
Again, similarly to the canister halves, the stiffening ring must also be verified to
have the correct tolerances. The stiffening ring tolerances are especially important
because they mesh with the edge of the canister walls. This meshing allows the tongue
and groove interface to make contact and help stiffen the canister assembly. Using the
CMM machine again we can measure the stiffening ring inner and outer radii. Since the
groove is extremely tiny, either the camera feature of the CMM will have to be used for
tracking the edge, or we can measure the outer or inner diameters and add the thickness
as an offset. The former being the more accurate option.
3) Canister hole alignment.
The three alignment pin in the canister are used for aligning the canister halves
together with the ring. If these holes aren’t properly aligned, or 120° apart from each
other this may cause issues with alignment or stress issues. Improper aligned holes will
89

cause wear on the edges as the threaded pins used will dig into the canister walls over
time causing permanent damage. Secondly, if the holes are not the 120° apart then this
will cause larger loads on the canister. The geometry of using three pins prevents any set
of two pins from being loaded too much directly. We will be using hand tools and the
CMM machine to verify hole alignment and position.
4) Porosity Verification.
As part of our material quality and verification it is essential that the fiberal
volume and quality of the part is measured. Porosity verification will tell us how many
voids or air pockets there are in the part. If the porosity percent is too large it will
exponentially decrease the strength of our part. By using prepreg over wet layup methods
we hope to make the canister body manufacturing more consistent and less reliant on the
user. It is more beneficial to have a constant amount of porosity than to have a lower
average percentage but a wide scatter in results. Porosity can be verified through
non-destructive testing methods highlighted in section 2.6.2 non-destructive testing of
this report.

5) Weight drop testing.
Our sponsor wants us to verify our bear canister design by dropping a 100 lb
weight from 1 ft high on both the side and top of the canister. This simulates a bear
stopping on the canister, as tested by the old SIBBG organization. Although this
organization doesn't exist anymore, it is still beneficial for us to test our canister with this
test as a basepoint and a comparison to the canister without the stiffening ring. The
previous deflection maximum from the weight drop was 0.25”, recently our sponsor has
removed this requirement to allow us to take advantage of the elastic and flexural
properties that carbon fiber has to offer.
6) Final live bear testing.
Following the penultimate 100 lb weight drop test, the canister will be iterated to
allow it to pass our final testing. To pass the live bear testing the canister will need to
withstand 60 minutes in a bear cage. To prepare from this test the best canister will be
submitted with all sharp edges removed and no edges larger than ⅛”. Upon successful
passing of the live bear testing the canister will be certified for use in the backpacking
community.
90

8.2 Design of the Manufacturing Process
8.2.1 Half Canister Body
The two half canister bodies will be manufactured similarly to the methods discussed in
Section 5. Because we will only be manufacturing halves, only bottom half of the mold will be
used. Two wet layups of a half canister have already been manufactured; however, the final
confirmation prototype will be manufactured out of prepreg. The same layup procedure and
stacking sequence will be used. Because the layup will now be open, a vacuum bagging process
will be performed which will be simpler than the previously used bladder molding process. This
is because more materials were necessary and pressure needed to be supplied to the oven for
bladder molding. Because a second bottom mold will not be manufactured, the existing bottom
mold will be used in two separate manufacturing processes to make the two halfs. During
production, two molds would be supplied to the technician. Because evacuating the canister pre
cure will supply the pressing force against the molds, the curing process will take place in the
autoclave in the composites lab, not in the large oven. Only the differences in the manufacturing
process were discussed in this section. For a complete description of the manufacturing process
that will be used, see Section 5, then consider the changes noted above. Figure 36 shows
materials needed for the vacuum bag lay up process. These were used during the previous wet
layups and the prepreg procedure will be the same process except for the carbon used and lack of
epoxy needed.

Figure 36. All required vacuum bagging materials are shown with the bottom
mold, four sidewall carbon sheets, and four base carbon fiber sheets.
91

8.2.2 Stiffening Ring
The stiffening ring will be made out of 18 total sheets of prepreg carbon fiber. The layers
will be wrapped inside of a female aluminum mold. The manufacturing process can be broken
down into three distinct procedures. In these parts, prepreg strips will be laid up vertically
building up the cross section as you see in Figure 37 from left to right. Table 28 gives more
details of the manufacturing procedures.
Table 28. The manufacturing process for the stiffening ring can be broken down
into three procedures. The table below gives more details on these
procedures.
Procedure

Procedure 1

Procedure 2

Procedure 3

Number of carbon layers

4

10

4

Height of carbon strips (in)

1.5

0.25

1.5

Figure 37. The cross section of the stiffening ring shows what section corresponds
to which manufacturing procedure.
During procedure 1, the four layers of carbon will be pressed into the side wall of the
centerpiece of the mold shown in Figure 38.
92

Figure 38. Four layers of prepreg carbon fiber will be laid up on the inside surface
of the centerpiece of the mold.
After the first four layers are set in place, the base piece of the mold, shown in Figure 39,
will be placed under the centerpiece.

Figure 39. The mold centerpiece with the first four layers will be placed on top of
the base piece shown. Then, ten layers will be pressed into the original
four with the support of the protruding aluminum ring.
Referring to Figure 39, the upwards protruding ring on the base piece of the mold will fill
the gap under the carbon of procedure 2 creating the bottom groove of the stiffening ring. Once
the base piece has been fastened with bolts to the centerpiece, procedure 2 will be performed.
The ten layers of ¼” tall strips of carbon will constitute the base of the grooves of the stiffening
ring. Once the ten ¼” tall strips of carbon are set in place, the top piece of the mold, shown in
Figure 40, will be placed.

93

Figure 40. The top piece of the mold will go on last. The bottom protruding
aluminum ring will sit on the top surface of the 10 layers of carbon.
Once the top piece is secured, the last 4 layers of carbon will be
pressed into the surface created by the inner surfaces of the
protruding rings and the carbon.
Referring to Figure 40, the downwards protruding ring on the top piece of the mold will
fill the gap above the the carbon of procedure 2. When the top piece of the mold has been
fastened with bolts, procedure 3 will be performed. Another four layers will be pressed into the
flush surface created by the base piece’s protruding ring, the carbon from procedure 2, and the
top piece’s protruding ring. This procedure is similar to procedure 1. Once all carbon is pressed
by hand into place and the mold is fastened, the complete mold, seen in Figure 41, will be
vacuum bagged and cured with the same cure cycle for the half canister body. To finish the part,
the three ⅛” through holes will be drilled into the ring at ¼” down from either edge.

Figure 41. An exploded view of the mold shows how the three pieces will fit
together during the layup process.
94

8.2.2.1 Canister Assembly
The groove of the stiffening ring without the through holes will be post bonded to the half
canister without the three holes drilled through it via West Systems 105/109 slow cure epoxy and
resin system. The nuts will be adhered with Gorilla Glue to the inside surface behind the drilled
holes. All sharp edges will be sanded down and once tolerances are checked, the canister
assembly will be complete.

8.2.3 Special Procedures
Upon completing the first operational ring, an iteration of the manufacturing process
could include the embedment of the nuts within the carbon fiber. This would involve the last
layer of carbon fiber to have appropriate markings of locations of the center of the nuts. Then,
during the layup, the technician will slide the nuts into the carbon and inspect when the nuts line
up with the pre marked locations. After cure, the drilled holes will go up to the last layer of
carbon, but not through it. This way, the laminate will adhere the nut naturally and it will be a
stronger bond. The canister will also be more aesthetically pleasing because the nuts will be
hidden behind the fiber. The disadvantage of this would be more difficult manufacturing, and
larger required tolerance due to the decreased accuracy from the manufacturing process.
The Velcro​® brand tape strips will be the last thing to adhere to the stiffening ring and
nylon net to complete the assembly. Six one inch long strips will be spaced out evenly around the
rim of the stiffening ring half way down. Corresponding strips will be sewn into the nylon net
evenly spaced. Future iterations could allow for smaller and fewer number of velcro strips on the
netting and stiffening ring.
When laying up the canister halves and the stiffening ring, the carbon fiber strips will be
laid up in an alternating fashion. For example, the start of the second strip of carbon fiber will be
approximately 90° apart from the start of the first carbon fiber strip. This avoids having all ends
of the carbon fiber strips at the same location post cure. Also, during the layup, a heat gun can be
used on the low setting from approximately 8 inches to make the carbon fiber more tacky and
malleable.

9 Manufacturing
9.1 Introduction
The manufacturing process was very similar to the manufacturing process described in Section
8.2. This section discusses the small differences, how the final parts of the canister assembly
95

were manufactured, manufacturing iterations, and recommendations for future manufacturing.
Two final canister prototypes were manufactured: one light version weighing 1.3 lb and one
more robust version weighing 1.7 lb. The only difference between the two canisters was the
number of layers of carbon fiber laid when manufacturing them. The 1.3 lb canister was made
with 3 layers of carbon fiber, and the 1.7 lb canister was made with 4 layers of carbon fiber.
Because that is the only difference, the rest of the chapter will provide only one process
assuming the 4-layered 1.7 lb canister is to be manufactured.

9.2 Canister Half
9.2.1 Mold
The mold used to manufacture the canister half was a modified mold from last year’s canister
mold. See Appendix K for more information about last year’s canister mold. The mold consists
of two parts: the mold base and the mold top support. Figure 42 shows the two mold parts.

9.2.2 Pre-Layup Process
By using the stencils provided, the carbon fiber was cut out from the roll. Four circles and four
sidewalls were cut out. The mold release was applied to the mold. High-temperature FibRelease
is recommended; however, any mold release can be used.

9.2.3 Laup Process
A sidewall cut out was laid in the mold first. It was important to press the carbon into the mold
firmly to make the best quality product. A circle is then laid into the base of the mold. Overlap
should be apparent when laying up the two pieces of carbon fiber. This process is continued for
all four layers.

9.2.4 Post-Layup Process
The vacuum bag is made using the peel-ply and breather fabrics under the vacuum bag. Figure
42 shows a picture of a canister half after it has been vacuum bagged.

96

Figure 42. The part has been vacuum bagged and is ready for evacuation and curing.
The mold base is the same mold base used from last year’s canister mold. The mold top support
was made by cutting the top half of last year’s canister mold to a height of two inches. This extra
height allows for a reliable method to release the canister half from the mold. The process of
releasing the part from the mold is as follows: (1) The mold top support is wedged off of the
canister half. (2) Two 1” holes are drilled in the upper canister half where the mold top support
was. These holes are across from one another. (3) A 1” steel bar is used to lever the canister half
out of the mold base. The levering process is shown in Figure 43.

Figure 43. The canister is being levered out of the mold.

97

9.3 Stiffening Ring
9.3.1 Mold
The final mold used to manufacture the stiffening ring consists of seven parts: the mandrel, three
tall spacing rings, and three short spacing rings. The middle mandrel was 3D printed out of
Polycarbonate (printed by Parts Oven LLC), and the spacing rings were 3D printed out of ABS
plastic. Figure 44 shows the stiffening ring mold.

9.3.2 Pre-Layup Process
9.3.2.1 Carbon Preparation
The stiffening ring requires a rectangular sheet of prepreg carbon fiber 30”x10”. A total of 16
strips will be cut out of this rectangle all with a length of 30”. Six of the strips will have a width
of 1.25” and ten of the strips will have a width of .25”. A carbon fiber trimmer is highly
recommended to make the cuts.
9.3.2.2 Mold Preparation
High temp FibRelease was applied to the mandrel. No other mold preparation procedures were
carried out.

9.3.3 Layup Process
Three of the 1.25” strips are wrapped around the mandrel. It is important to wrap the layers with
tension to provide better lamination between layers. After this step, it is encouraged to debulk
under a vacuum overnight. After debulking, the ten .25” strips are to be laid up. They are to be
oriented so .625” is above the stips and .325” is below them. Once the strips have been wrapped,
the six spacing rings are to be placed. The three tall spacing rings are placed above the .25” strips
and the three short spacing rings are placed below the .25” strips. The spacing rings are printed
so .08” exists in between two adjacent sections. This allows for pressure to be exerted on the
inner three 1.25” strips that have already been laid. The three-part spacing rings act as a clamp
on the inner layers when vacuumed. It is encouraged to debulk overnight after this step. Figure
44 shows the stiffening ring at this step.

98

Figure 44. The spacing ring mold parts and the .25” carbon fiber strips create a flush outer
surface. The final layers of the stiffening ring are ready to be laid up.
After debulking, the final three 1.25” strips are laid on the outermost surface created by the
spacing rings and .25” strips and the assembly is ready to be cured. Figure 45 shows the
stiffening ring evacuated and in the autoclave. To accommodate the relatively low glass
transition temperature of the 3D printed molds, the assembly’s cure cycle is as follows:
● Ramp up​ oven to 200° F at a rate of 3°F per minute.
● Hold​ temperature at 200°F for 600 minutes (10 hours).
● Ramp down​ temperature at rate of 3°F per minute until 105°F.

99

Figure 45. The stiffening ring is ready for curing.

9.3.4 Post-Layup Process
Take the assembly out of the vacuum bag and remove the breather bag and peel-ply. Because of
the Polycarbonate’s higher coefficient of thermal expansion, the mandrel will contract more than
the carbon during the ramp down and will slide out of the assembly with ease. To get the ABS
spacing rings out of the part, the assembly (excluding the mandrel) is submerged in an acetone
bath. After five days, the ABS will have fully dissolved in the acetone leaving the carbon fiber
stiffening ring. Figure 46 shows the ring being cleaned of ABS as the acetone dissolves it.

100

Figure 46. The acetone bath can be seen in the background. The stiffening ring grooves are being
scraped to increase efficiency of the acetone dissolving process.
It is recommended to scrape as much ABS out of the part every day with a thin metal tool such
as a screwdriver. It is also recommended to let the carbon fiber stiffening ring dry for at least
three days to regain its hardness. After the ring has dried, three holes are drilled at 120° apart
from one another 5/16” from the top (refer to stiffening ring drawings for clarification). Once the
holes have been drilled, the stiffening ring is sanded and sprayed with one layer of clear coat for
aesthetics.

9.3.5 Manufacturing Iterations
Four stiffening rings were manufactured. Descriptions about each are below.
● Stiffening Ring #1: The entire mold was manufactured out of polycarbonate. The spacing
rings of the mold were one piece instead of broken up into three pieces. After curing
Stiffening Ring #1, the spacing rings never came out of the part. Because the molds never
released, ABS printed molds were designed for Stiffening Ring #2 with the plan of
dissolving them with acetone. Also, the inner wall of the stiffening ring did not get ample
pressure. The carbon fibers making up the inner wall were delaminating. The spacing
rings of the mold were designed to be split up into three pieces to provide a clamping
action on the inner wall. Figure 47 shows Stiffening Ring #1 being laid up.

Figure 47. Stiffening Ring #1 mid layup is shown.
● Stiffening Ring #2: The changes mentioned above were implemented in Stiffening Ring
#2. After the cure and acetone bath, the ring was too small. Stiffening Ring #3 was then
designed to have a larger diameter.

101

● Stiffening Ring #3: The diameter of the mandrel was enlarged by wrapping tape around
it. Figure 48 shows the mandrel after it was enlarged. The nuts were also implemented
into the layup. Figure 49 shows the nuts before the cure. Nuts in the layup proved to pose
more problems than they solved, so this was abandoned in Stiffening Ring #4.

Figure 48. The enlarged mandrel is shown.

Figure 49. Nuts were implemented into the layup for Stiffening Ring #3. (Left) The nuts were
placed after the first two layers were laid, and (right) the second two layers were then laid over
them.
● Stiffening Ring #4: The nuts were not implemented into Stiffening Ring #4. See sections
9.3.1-9.3.4 for more details about the manufacturing of Stiffening Ring #4.

9.3.6 Recommendations for Future Manufacturing
Depending on 3D printer capabilities, the middle mandrel could be printed out of ABS or any
other type of plastic. If the acetone-bath removal method is used to dissolve the spacing rings,
the spacing rings should be printed out of ABS. Another option is to print the spacing rings out
of PVA or PLA plastic and dissolve them post-cure in water.
102

10 Design Verification & Testing
Rama
Include (but not limited to):
1. Test descriptions with photos
2. Detailed results
3. Specification verification checklist or DVPR

10.1 Instron Testing
Instron testing is an effective way to evaluate the strength of a sample using simple equipment.
Typically an instron compression machine is used to determine the elastic modulus of a material
or the stress-strain curve. For our canister, due to the complex nature of the composite material
and non-optimal material (the prepreg carbon weave was donated due to it’s expired nature) it
was more useful, and easier, to obtain a load-deflection curve. A strain deflection curve would
require the use of strain gauges and additional complex monitoring equipment. The last critical
reason for choosing to develop a load-deflection curve over a stress-strain curve was that we had
a jig for holding the canister parts in the instron already made from previous instron testing. The
instron testing description and details can be seen earlier in section 7.1 of this report.

10.1.1 Canister Half
10.1.1.1 Strength Test: 4-Layer Canister Half
In section 7.1 of this report an initial four layer thick walled canister was tested to failure to show
the maximum force a half canister can withstand. Although the stiffening ring is designed to take
the majority of the load, the half canisters can be used to reinforce the ring. Additionally, we
wanted to see the canister load at 0.25” and 0.5” inches deflection. Referenced below in Figure
50 is the previous instron testing results for reference, with a maximum load of 438 lbf.

103

Figure 50. Original Instron Half Canister of a Four-Layer 5 hour cure
10.1.1.2 Stiffness Test: 5-Hour Cure vs 12-Hour Cure
Previously, it was decided that a wet carbon fiber weave was inferior to the prepreg
carbon fiber weave due to it’s ease of manufacturing and repeatability. It was also shown that
the wall thickness of the prepreg composite was more uniform. Our second test was to compare
the strength of a longer cure cycle versus a shorter one. Our Cytec 5320-1 prepreg resin system
has a recommended cure cycle time of 3 hours (5 total with ramp and cool down). On the other
hand our 3D printed mandrel mold has a glass transition temperature of 200F meaning that our
autoclave oven needs to be decreased by 50F. Standard practice is to increase cure time by one
hour for every 10F decrease, yielding an 8 hour cure cycle. We increased this cycle to 10 hours
for good measures and with ramp and cooldown it is 12 hours.

104

Figure 51. Instron Results from Various Cure Cycle Times
On the instron we tested both a 5 hour cure and 12 hour cure cycled canister halves to
compare the effect of increasing the cure time. The previous Figure 51 shows that for our four
layer sample, the 12 and 5 hour cures had similar load-deflection curves, with the 5 hour cure
being 11% higher at 1 inch of deflection. For smaller deflections, closer to what the canister
would experience out in the field, the load difference at 0.25inches was less than a 1 lbf
difference. This showed that the cure cycle makes less than <5% difference for our small angle
deflections. Using our small angle assumption for small deflections, we can linearize the
stiffness curve around the origin. The canister is approximately 67 lbf/inch for small deflections
up to 0.25inch, showing that our canister acts like a spring for small deflections.
10.1.1.3 Stiffness Test: 3-Layer Canister Half vs 4-Layer Canister Half
The red line in the figure also shows the three layered canister half load deflection curve
which showed the huge increase in stiffness going from a three layer to a four layer canister. At
one inch of deflection the three layered canister half was approximately 50% of the four layer
canister. Although the stiffness is much less, it can be justified by the 0.4 lbf decrease in weight.
The three layer canister was only cured at the 12 hour cure cycle since it was often cured
simultaneously with the stiffening ring. The three layer, 12 hour cure, canister half reached a
maximum load of 60 lbf at 1 inch. Using the 11% increase in stiffness from the four layer

105

canister trials, we can estimate that a 5 hour cure for the 3 layered canister would be able to to
take approximately 66 lbf.

10.1.2 Canister Assembly
10.1.2.1 Stiffness Test: 1.3 lbs Canister Assembly vs 1.7 lbs Canister Assembly
Our canister assembly consists of the two canister halves and the stiffening ring. We
chose to test the full assembly as it a better representation of the entire canister than just the
stiffening ring alone. Our target goal for this project was not met by our original 4-layered 1.7lb
canister so a second iteration of 1.3lbs and three layered wall was made which was lighter and
had a slightly less thick stiffening ring.

Figure 52. Full Assembly Instron Stiffness Comparison of Light and Heavy Canisters
The results of our test in Figure 52 corroborated our hypothesis that the 1.7lb assembly
featuring more layers on the ring and halves would be the stronger of the two. Surprisingly, the
1.7lb assembly was only slightly stiffer than the 1.3lb assembly. We believe that the acetone bath
had significantly softened the 1.7lb stiffening ring. Residual moisture in the rings significantly
reduces their stiffness to the point that even simple inspection by hand can notice a large
difference. After thorough drying for multiple days the rings return to their initial strength. The
106

bear minimum team found the 1.7lb stiffening ring was not fully dry at the time of the test which
may have reduced its strength slightly.

10.2 Drop Testing
10.2.1 Introduction
A series of drop tests were carried out to simulate an equivalent dynamic load exerted by a bear.
When the agency existed, the SIBBG required canisters to pass 100 lb top and side drop tests
from 1 ft high for canister certification. As a precedent, these two drop tests were chosen to test
the 1.3 lb and 1.7 lb Bear Minimum bear canisters. See Section 10.2.2 for the full drop test setup,
procedure, and safety information. Sections 10.2.3 and 10.2.4 discuss each test performed. These
descriptions are categorized by a thumb-screw locking mechanism, a threaded rod locking
mechanism, or an epoxy bond. The thumb-screw locking mechanism refers to the locking
mechanism proposed in the final design description (refer to section 7.2). The threaded rod
locking mechanism and epoxy bond were alternative locking mechanisms tested for the side drop
test only. The intent of these alternatives was to verify whether each canister would pass with a
different locking mechanism. The three types of locking mechanisms are shown side by side in
Figure 53 before the 100 lbs was dropped.

Figure 53. (Left) The 1.7 lb canister is shown with the thumb screw locking
mechanism. (Middle) The 1.3 lb canister is shown with the epoxy
bond. (Right) The 1.7 lb canister is shown with a threaded rod through
the canister secured by three washers and a nut on both sides.

107

A failing grade was given to any canister that showed any fiber failure, delamination, or part
separation.

10.2.2 Drop Testing Plan
10.2.2.1 Introduction & Objective
The SIBBG (Sierra Interagency Black Bear Group) used to conduct drop testing on bear canister
to validate their strength and resilience in the case a bear applies a compressive load to the
canister outside. The SIBBG ceased its existence in the late 2013’s but provided a good
basepoint for impact testing. ​The drop test in particular provides a good introduction to live bear
testing. ​Previous canisters such as the BearVault have been tested in similar ways as seen in the
following story:
“​During the autumn and winter of 2002/2003, BearVault made several prototypes which
were impact-tested by the Sierra Interagency Black Bear Group (SIBBG). By May 2003,
we had a canister that was ready for the ultimate test: a trial stint with Fisher, the 560
pound black bear at the Folsom Zoo. Fisher, with his massive bulk and powerful jaws,
had sent many designers back to the drawing board. It turned out, that is exactly what he
did to this early BearVault design as well. The SIBBG required the canister to last one
full hour – but after just 8 minutes, Fisher had torn into the canister, and claimed his tasty
reward of meat, peanut butter and jelly.”
10.2.2.2 Goals
Similar to the SIBBG testing criteria, we are going to test the canister by dropping a 100lb
weight from one foot high onto both the side and top of the canister. Although SIBBG had a
maximum deflection requirement of 0.25”, given carbon fiber’s unique elastic properties we are
not limiting our deflection requirement. A successful canister will pass both the side and top
drop tests without fracturing, fraying, or yielding. This result is desirable to improve the lifecycle
and structural integrity of a canister. A structurally compromised canister may not withstand
subsequent bear attacks.
10.2.2.3 Schematic:
The following schematic in Figure 54 shows our testing setup which consists of the canister
inside a plexiglass enclosure, high speed camera, and 100lb weight tied to a pulley system.

108

Figure 54. ​Schematic of Drop Testing Apparatus
10.2.2.4 Equipment and Specifications:
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

150lb+ rated rope
150lb+ rated pulley
100lb Weight and Platform
2 foot+ long ruler
Plexiglass sheet
Cinder Blocks For barrier
Restraining wood block
Video Camera (High speed Preferred)
Base mounting restraint

10.2.2.5 Preparation
● Base and Enclosure:

109

The canister will be enclosed inside of a heavy duty plastic container to prevent lateral
movement and stray debris. The camera-facing edge will be removed and a transparent
plexiglass sheet placed in the cutout. (This will allow the camera picture to be clear and the lens
protected). Inside the enclosure the canister will be placed in the center with restraining blocks or
books placed on the side to prevent sliding of the canister out of the camera frame. The
restraining blocks will not prevent the canister from deflecting or changing shape, just preventing
slippage. A ruler will be adhere to the enclosure base to allow for a scale and weight vertical
alignment.
● Camera:
The high speed camera will be placed a safe distance from the test apparatus (10ft) and
the focus zoomed in on the plexiglass display. It will be run a few seconds before the drop to
allow the operator to move a safe distance away. A secondary mobile camera will also take
video for additional footage.
● Pulley System:
The pulley system is responsible for hoisting the 100lb weight and platform to the
required height of 1 foot (relative) to the top of the canister. The ruler will allow for vertical
alignment
10.2.2.6 Safety and Risks
Special safety precautions are needed in this test due to a large mass being dropped. The mass
needs to be contained when it is impacted by a safety enclosure. The enclosure built of cinder
blocks also ensures that the canister or any fragments do not fly out and injure the operators or an
expensive camera. Special attention to the order of operations is needed. All personnel involved
in the drop test must be out of range of the impact before the weight is dropped. Safety glasses
will be worn at all times.
10.2.2.7 Procedure
After mounting the pulley to a the vertical support a rope will be attached through a clovehitch
knot to the dumbbell. The canister will then be placed into the encasement with the supporting
blocks. The high speed camera placed 10 feet away and angled at the subject impact zone. The
weight will be lifted to one foot high by the primary person. The secondary person will verify the
correct height. The secondary person will then start the camera and move to a safe distance
away. The primary person will then drop the weight and is responsible for stopping the
camera(s).
The test will be repeated on the side and top of canister. Four tests in total will be conducted: two
on a canister with three layers of wall thickness, and two on a thicker four layered wall canister.

110

10.2.2.8 Pass/Fail Criteria
A successful canister will be deemed “passing” if it maintains the criteria described in Table 29.
Table 29. Pass Criteria for Drop Testing to be met
Pass Criteria
-No composite fiber yield
-No permanent deflection. (Elastic
Regime)
-No carbon fraying
-No carbon fracture
-No dents or cavities greater than ⅛”
-Weight dropped directly vertically
All Criteria MUST be met to PASS

10.2.3 Four Layer 1.7lb Canister
10.2.3.1 Top Drop Test #1: Thumb-Screw Locking Mechanism
Figure 55 shows the 1.7 lb canister during the impact. The canister passed the top drop test.
Because the canister featured the thumb-screw locking mechanism, top drop tests were not
performed with the epoxy bond or threaded rod locking mechanisms.

111

Figure 55. The top drop test impact with the 1.7 lb canister is shown.
10.2.3.2 Side Drop Test #1: Thumb-Screw Locking Mechanism
The 1.7 lb canister with the thumb-screw locking mechanism failed the side drop test. Figure 56
shows the canister during the impact, and Figure 57 shows a close up view of the failure.

Figure 56. The side drop test impact with the 1.7 lb canister is shown. The bolt
hole is shown shearing during the impact.

Figure 57. A close up view of the failure is shown. Four of the six bolt holes
sheared during the side impact.
The fiber failure under the bolt holes was due to shear stress concentrations around the bolt
holes. This stress around the bolt holes was larger than anticipated due to the impact time of
approximately .0083 seconds compared to the expected impact time of 0.10 seconds. This failure
was a design failure. Further FEA is required to determine how much stress the carbon fiber
experiences around the bolt holes from the shorter impact time and appropriate adjustments to
112

the design should be made. Depending on the amount of support necessary, steel washers
implemented into the layup could be a sufficient course of action.
10.2.3.3 Side Drop Test #2: Epoxy Bond
Figure 58 shows the 1.7 lb canister during the impact. As seen in the figure, the epoxy bond
failed on impact.

Figure 58. The side drop test impact with the 1.7 lb canister and epoxy bond is
shown. The epoxy bond failed during the impact as seen in the image.
The intent of the epoxy was to create a permanent bond between the canisters. However, the
impact force was large enough to break the adhesion. All of the individual parts of the canister
were intact; the canister assembly only experienced part separation. Because the carbon fiber did
not delaminate or break, the test result was ruled plausible. If a locking mechanism was designed
to keep the parts together, the 1.7 lb canister would pass the side drop test.
10.2.3.4 Side Drop Test #3: Threaded Rod Locking Mechanism (Hand-Tightened)
A threaded rod locking mechanism was created by drilling holes through the middle of the ends
of the canister. A threaded rod with three different sizes of washers and a two nuts on each end
were used to secure the assembly. Figure 59 shows the locking mechanism:

113

Figure 59. The threaded rod locking mechanism is shown. Three different sized
washers were used on each end to diminish the stress concentration.
The canister failed the side drop test due to part separation. The impact and failure is shown in
Figures 60 and 61, respectively.

Figure 60. The side drop test with the 1.7 lb canister and hand-tightened threaded
rod locking mechanism is shown. Part separation is visible.

114

Figure 61. After the impact, the canister half was not fully seated in the stiffening
ring.
Similarly to Side Drop Test #2, the failure was only part separation; all carbon fiber remained
intact. This supports the conclusion that if a new locking mechanism could successfully keep the
assembly together, then the 1.7 lb canister would pass the side drop test.
10.2.3.5 Side Drop Test #4: Threaded Rod Locking Mechanism (Wrench-Tightened)
After the canister assembly showed part separation in the Dise Drop Test #3, the nuts on both
ends were tightened with a wrench and the canister was tested again. Figure 62 shows the 1.7 lb
canister during the impact.

Figure 62. The side drop test with the 1.7 lb canister and wrench-tightened
threaded rod locking mechanism is shown. Part separation is visible.
115

Similarly to Side Drop Test #3, the non-adhered canister half separated from the stiffening ring.
It is important to note the gap between parts was smaller as seen in Figure 62 when compared to
Figure 60. This was due to the added extra compression from tightening the nuts with the
wrench. The canister also failed the test due to fiber failure and delamination at one location on
the non-adhered canister half. Figure 63 shows this failure.

Figure 63. The canister half failed at the seam of the layup. This failure does not
contradict the analysis completed during the design phase, because the
design of the part did not take into account the extra pre-loading from
tightening the nuts.
10.2.3.5.1 Failure Analysis: Canister Half Fiber Failure and Delamination

This failure would be classified as a design failure. The failure would occur again if the same test
was repeated. Comparing this result to the results from Side Drop Test #3, the reason why the
canister half experienced fiber failure and delamination was because of the initial added
compression the washers exerted on the canister ends from tightening the nuts with the wrench.
Because of this pre-loading, the stress on the ends of the canister was greater than in Side Drop
Test #3 causing the canister half to fail. The reason why the canister half failed at the filleted
edge was because of the layup procedure. The filleted edge was where the sidewall layers
overlapped the bottom layers, or the seam in the layup. That is why the delamination and fiber
failure occurred here. If the final locking mechanism features an initial compressive load on the
canister, the structural design of the canister half needs to be revisited to make it stronger.
10.2.3.6 lb Canister Conclusion
As mentioned earlier, the feasibility of the 1.7 lb canister was decided to be plausible. Because
there were not any part failures during the side drop test (excluding Drop Test #4), it can be
concluded that if a locking mechanism was to be designed to keep the assembly together during
impact, the canister would pass the top and side drop tests.
116

10.2.4 Three Layer 1.3lb Canister
10.2.4.1 Top Drop Test #1: Epoxy Bond
Figure 64 shows the 1.3 lb canister during the impact. The canister passed the top drop test.

Figure 64. The top drop test impact with the 1.7 lb canister is shown.
10.2.4.2 Side Drop Test #1: Epoxy Bond
The epoxy bonded 1.3 lb canister failed the side drop test. The stiffening ring experienced fiber
failure, and the canister half experienced fiber failure and delamination. The epoxy bond also
broke causing part separation. Figures 65, 66, and 67 show the impact, the stiffening ring failure,
and the canister half failure, respectively.

Figure 65. The impact is shown. The fiber failure of the stiffening ring can be
seen in this image.
117

Figure 66 and 67. The stiffening ring failure is shown from the top view (left) and
the front view (right).
10.2.4.2.1 Failure Analysis: Stiffening Ring Failure

The stiffening ring failure can be categorized as a design failure, specifically a failure within the
design of the manufacturing process. As a result of the current vacuum bagging manufacturing
process, wrinkles on the outside edge of the stiffening ring formed. The wrinkles were then
sanded down after the cure, breaking the continuous carbon fibers. This location, where the
wrinkles got sanded down, was where the part failed. The sanded-down wrinkle is visible in
Figure 68. The bolt hole also added a stress concentration at this location on the stiffening ring. It
is recommended that the manufacturing process is to be altered to get rid of the wrinkles, and to
move the drilled holes off of the sanded-down wrinkles.

Figure 68. The canister half failure is shown from the inside (left) and from the
outside (right). The location of the failure was on the seam of the
sidewall of the canister half.
118

10.2.4.2.2 Failure Analysis: Canister Half Failure

Manufacturing was accountable for the canister half failure. The failure would not necessarily
occur again if the same test was repeated. The other canister half was manufactured using the
same methods, and it did not fail. This means the 3-layer prototype canister half has a 50%
failure rate. After speaking with Real Carbon Inc., a professional composite manufacturing
company, a reasonable failure rate is 25% for prototypes going through testing. If the sample size
was increased, a more accurate failure rate could be assigned to this part.
10.2.4.3 lb Canister Conclusion
The feasibility of the 1.3 lb canister design was decided to be inconclusive. This is because the
first failure for the canister assembly was the epoxy breaking. When the epoxy failed, the load
path was broken meaning the dynamic load was unable to be transferred from the point of
impact, the stiffening ring, into both canister halves and then back through the stiffening ring.
Because of this, there is a chance that the broken load path caused the sequential stiffening ring
and canister half failures. Further side drop testing of the 1.3 lb canister is required to determine
the feasibility of the 1.3 lb canister.

11 Full Scale Manufacturing Analysis
In anticipation for future full scale manufacturing the Bear Minimum team consulted with
four senior industrial engineering students in the IME 443 class at Cal Poly. The following
students were responsible for investigating the feasibility, cost, and process flow for
manufacturing: Wicky Woo, George Merida, Alyssa Leventis, and Jesse Yap. The initial goal
was to design for a manufacturing rate of 5,000 units per year, or approximately 20 units each
day for 250 yearly working days.
After discussing the process flow for creating a canister the following key step blocks were
discovered and a process flow was created in Figure 69.

119

Figure 69. Manufacturing Key steps
Regarding the materials needed in the process, the three key parts are the carbon fiber, molds, and final
assembly (ring and two halves).
Material Flow:
● Raw Carbon Fiber: Freezer → Carbon Fiber Prep → Carbon Fiber Laying
● Molds: Mold Prep → Carbon Laying → Hydraulic Press → Assembly Prep
● Finished Parts: Locking Mechanism → Ring → Final Assembly and Packaging
To achieve the material flow the raw carbon fiber, molds, and assembly require 12 steps spanning 3.83
hours (230 minutes total). These steps are highlighted in Table 30 in the order they occur.

120

Table 30. Operations list for Bear Canister Production

The total time divided by the number of operations yielded an average time of 20 minutes per station. The
following departments are needed to achieve the following process flow without bottlenecking. The
following departments and quantities were identified:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.

Carbon Fiber Prep
Mold Prep
3x Carbon Fiber Laying
4x Hydraulic Pressing
Assembly Prep
2x Locking Mechanism Assembly
Ring Assembly
Final Assembly and Packaging

The following schematic in Figure 70 shows the layout of the manufacturing assembly giving a
2:3 depth to width ratio of the building. Departments related to the same material flows were put
near each other to promote productivity and less transportation time between steps.

121

Figure 70. Layout of Department Stations in a Manufacturing Space

Operating the facility will take a total of 10 laborers to run the facility, 3 of them are highly
skilled for more critical steps and require a higher hourly rate. The total labor cost is $285,000
per year as seen in Table 31 .
Table 31. Labor Needed for 5,000 units per year

Labor Type

Hourly Rate

Yearly Cost

Quantity

Skilled

$23

$46,000

3

Unskilled

$10.50

$21,000

7

Total labor cost per year

$285,000

The stations will need various storage chests, cutting machines, and presses to process listed in
Table 32 below. The freezer is used to store raw carbon, and the presses are used to quickly cure
the canister halves.

Table 32 Equipment Needed for 5,000 units per year
Item

Cost

Supplier

Quantity

Chest Freezer (6’ Width)

$550

Sears

1

Die Cutting Press

$3,000

Tippmann

1

122

Hydraulic Heat Press

$5,000

Ebay

4

Drill Press

$3,400

Max Tool

1

Half Mold

$8,000

Nick’s Estimate

8

Ring Mold

$2,500

Nick’s Estimate

4

Silicone

$889

MC Silicone

60 kg

Workbenches (60”x30”,
96”x36”)

$190, $320

Global Industrial

10

Total initial investment

$103,869

Total cost for manufacturing will be -$425k first year and -$323k for subsequent years to
account for a fixed labor cost and material cost for each canister. The full final powerpoint
presentation can be seen in Appendix N below.

12 Conclusion
The Bear Minimum project has spanned two years and two complete senior project
design cycles. This year’s senior project was a continuation aimed at designing the lid for the last
year’s canister. We had a small team of only two people requiring us to be very organized,
scheduled, and proactive in our work.
Following the design process we started the year with the ideation phase which involved
creating many different ideas for opening structures, mechanisms, and locations. After selecting
a middle opening design using channel push points we found that the parts were too flimsy to be
feasible. We went back to the drawing board and created our H-Channel, double
tongue-and-groove locking mechanism which is structurally sound. The H cross section mimics
an I-beam giving the canister excellent radial stiffness and rigidity.
Overall our project was a monumental success as we successfully redesigned the canister
to open from the center and improve the radial rigidity which was the major design weakness.
Our design also allows the tongue and groove interface to make contact around the entire rim.
We succeeded in overcoming manufacturing challenges such as mold removal, insufficient
lamination and removing spacers. We innovated by using cheap 3D printed rings as the spacers
which we successfully melted out. Additional successes include an innovative two material, 7
123

piece mandrel mold for the stiffening ring and making two iterations: 1.3lbs and 1.7lbs
respectively.
The lighter 1.3lb canister passed the top drop test, but did not pass the side test due to
delamination crack propagation inside the stiffening ring.
The heavier 1.7lb canister passed the top drop test, but also didn’t pass the side drop test.
We believe that it plausibly could pass in the future if the locking mechanism between the
canister halves and the ring is better reinforced. Failure in our testing was always observed at this
interface, but never in the actual stiffening ring or halves which leads us to believe the canister
design is plausible.
In comparison to our original project specifications we successfully passed most of our
target specifications in Table 33. Most of the geometry requirements were met and also quality
of the weave. Weight was also achieved, but drop testing was not. We did not submit the canister
for live bear testing.
Table 33. Original Specification Sheet Comparison
Category

#

Specification

Target

Tolerance

Risk

Verification

1

Internal Volume

650 in​3

Min

L

PASS

2

Size (Length x Diameter)

11” x 9”

+/- 0.25”

L

PASS

Total Weight

1.3 lb​f

Max

M

PASS

4

Lid Weight

0.20 lb​f

Max

M

N/A

5

Largest gap diameter

0.25”

Max

M

PASS

Quality
Control

6

Diameter of the opening in
canister body

6.5”

+/- 0.25”

L

FAIL

7

Void volume fraction

5%

Max

M

N/A

Operation

8

Torque necessary to open
5.1 ft-lb​f​*
canister

Max

L

PASS

Forces and
Torques

9

Weight dropped during
the drop test from 1 ft high

100 lb​f

Min

H

FAIL

0.125”

Min

M

PASS

Part Geometry 3

10
Safety

Motion

Filleted edge radius

11

Removable parts sizes
(choking hazard)

1.75” x
1”

Min

L

PASS

12

Time to remove latched
lid

30 sec

Max

L

PASS

124

13
Production
and Quality

Cost

Amount of weave
distortion on exterior
(normalized by surface
area)

15%

Max

H

PASS

Time in live contact with
14 bear (according to SIBBG
Certification)

60 min

Min

H

N/A

15

$2,000

Max

M

PASS

Total cost

The manufacturing process for our final canister was not optimized but we successfully
lead a team of students to investigate short cure cycles and the costs.
The Bear Minimum team would like to extend our thanks to the following people for providing
technical excellence, manufacturing assistance, and project support:
● Project Sponsor:​ Nick Hellewell
● Senior Project Advisor:​ Peter J. Schuster
● Professors:​ Joseph Mello (ME) , Xuan Wang (IME), Sthanu Mahadev (ME), Eltahry
Elghandour (ME)
● Technical Experts:​ George Leone,
● Students:​ Eli Rogers (ME) , Mel Boonya-ananta (ME), Wicky Woo (IE), Alyssa
Leventis (IE), Jesse Yap (IE), George Merida (IE)
● Other: ​Mechanical Engineering Shops, Parts Oven LLC.

13 References
[1] "Which Canisters Are Allowed?" Allowed Canisters | Bears. N.p., n.d. Web. 25 Oct.. 2016.
[2] Arranging to Have a Product Tested. In: Interagency Grizzly Bear Committee.
http://igbconline.org/product-testing/. Accessed 25 Oct 2016
[3] "Bear Safety Product Testing | Grizzly Wolf Disc. Center." Grizzly and Wolf Discovery
Center. N.p., n.d. Web. 17 Nov. 2016.
[4]
How
does
the
Certification
Process
Work?
http://www.hunnycanisters.com/faq/. Accessed 25 Oct 2016

In:

Hunny

Canisters.

[5] Courtesy of forum users at: www.reddit.com/r/backpacking
125

[6] Courtesy of forum users at: www.trailgroove.com/forums/
[7]
Martin
SR,
McCurdy
K
(2010)
Wilderness
Food
Storage.
http://users.humboldt.edu/steve.martin/research/martin_mccurdy_ijw.pdf. Accessed 25 Oct 2016
[8] Courtesy of product imagery from: ​http://www.mcmaster.com
[9] Photo courtesy of encore composites at encoreaerospoace.com
[10] DeForrest AL, Kent CJ (2002) Impact Resistant Sealable Container. In: uspto.gov.
http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-parser?sect2=pto1§2=hitoff&p=1&u=/netahtml/pto/search-boo
l.html&r=1&f=g&l=50&d=pall&refsrch=yes&query=pn/6343709. Accessed 25 Oct 2016
[11] McCall M, Vinson JW (1989) Animal Proof Container. In: US Patent Office.
http://patft.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-parser?sect1=pto1§2=hitoff&d=pall&p=1&u=/netahtml/pto/sr
chnum.htm&r=1&f=g&l=50&s1=4801039.pn.&os=pn/4801039&rs=pn/4801039. Accessed 25
Oct 2016
[12] Daniel, Isaac M., and Ori Ishai. Engineering Mechanics of Composite Materials. New York:
Oxford UP, 1994. Print.
[13] "Compression Molding Process / SMC." Compression Molding Process. N.p., n.d. Web. 17
Nov. 2016.
[14] "Compression Molding - ADVANCED
COMPOSITES INC. N.p., n.d. Web. 17 Nov. 2016.

COMPOSITES

INC."

ADVANCED

[15] "Bladder Molding." Bladder Molding - Manufacturing Processes - Custom. N.p., n.d. Web.
17 Nov. 2016.
[16] BearVault BV500 Food Container. In: Recreational Equipment Incorporated.
https://www.rei.com/product/768902/bearvault-bv500-food-container. Accessed 25 Oct 2016
[17] "Learning Center - Vacuum Bagging Equipment & Techniques for Room-Temp
Applications." Fibre Glast. N.p., n.d. Web. 17 Nov. 2016.
[18] ​http://digitalcommons.calpoly.edu/mesp/309/
126

Beasley N, Rogers E, Wilson C, Wood D (2016) Ultra-Light Bear Canister. In: Digital
Commons. http://digitalcommons.calpoly.edu/mesp/309/. Accessed 25 Oct 2016. Senior Project
[19] Food Handling and Storage for Campers. Wood TD (2016) Recreational Equipment Inc. In:
Recreational
Equipment
Inc.
https://www.rei.com/learn/expert-advice/food-handling-storage.html. Accessed 25 Oct 2016
[20] Yuhazri MY, Phonsakorn PT, Sihombng H (2010) A Comparison Process Between Vacuum
Infusion and Hand Lay-Up Method Toward Kenaf/Polyster Composites. In: International Journal
of Basic and Applied Sciences. http://www.ijens.org/103803-1717 ijbas-ijens.pdf. Accessed 25
Oct 2016
[21] Foderaro LW (2009) Bear-Proof Can Is Pop-Top Picnic for a Crafty Thief. In: New York
Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2009/07/25/nyregion/25bear.html?hp&_r=0. Accessed 25 Oct
2016
[22] HUMAN PERFORMANCE CAPABILITIES. In: Man-Systems Integration Standards.
https://msis.jsc.nasa.gov/sections/section04.htm#figure 4.9.3-8. Accessed 25 Oct 2016
[23] @EasyComposites. "{{model.productMeta.WebStoreDisplayName}}." Easy Composites.
N.p., n.d. Web. 17 Nov. 2016.
[24] "Sailrite - Fabric, Canvas, and Sewing Machines Since 1969." Sailrite - Fabric, Canvas, and
Sewing Machines Since 1969. N.p., n.d. Web. 17 Nov. 2016.
[25] Ashbee, Kenneth HG. Fundamental Principles of Fiber Reinforced Composites. 2nd Edition
ed. Lancaster, Pennsylvania: Technomic, 1993. Google Books. Web. 9 Feb. 2017.

127

Appendices
A.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.
M.
N.
O.

Quality Function Deployment (QFD) Chart
Hand Calculations
Drawings of Nine Selected Designs
Layout Drawings of Selected Top and Middle Opening Designs
Design Hazard Identification Checklist
Gantt Chart
Case Study: Composite Manufacturing Processes
Formula SAE Carbon Fiber Testing Data
Budget Sheet
Design Validation Report (DVP)
CAD Drawings
Specifications Sheets
Case Study: Bear Canister Finite Element Analysis (FEA)
Case Study: Industrial Engineering Full Scale Manufacturing Study
Operator’s Manual

128

129

Appendix A: QFD - House of Quality
Project:
Revision: 1
Date: 10/25/16

Correlations

+
í

No Correlation

+
í

Relationships

+
í
+

Direction of Improvement

[Maximum sale price of $500]

4

|||||

10%

10

10

10

9

Hand needs to fit in lid opening

5

|||

8%

6

8

8

9

No extra tools required for opening

6

||||

9%

10

8

8

9

Strong enough for 100 lbf drop test

7

|

3%

10

0

0

9

Lid needs to be a structural element

8

||||

9%

10

8

8

9

No gaps in canister larger than .25 in

9

|||

8%

6

8

8

9

Lid removal must take less than 30 s

10 ||

5%

5

5

5

9

Lid must go through testing

11 |||||

10%

10

10

10

9

Lid must be able to lock

12 ||

6%

5

10

2

9

No sharp protruding edges

13 ||

6%

10

3

5

9

No choking hazards

14 |

3%

10

0

0

9

Total project cost under $2000

3

5

0

5

5

5

1

5

0

0

5

0

0

2

5

5

5

5

5

5

3

5

5

5

5

5

5

4

5

0

0

5

0

5

5

5

5

5

0

5

5

6

5

5

5

5

5

5

7

5

5

5

5

5

5

8

5

5

5

5

5

5

9

5

5

5

5

5

5

10

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

0

0

0

0

0

3

9

9

9

9

9

9

9

9

9

9

9

166.5

299.5

294.5

243.2

91.58

249.8

261

106.5

111

135

271.8

7%

13%

13%

11%

4%

11%

12%

5%

5%

6%

12%

|||||

|||||

||

||

|||

||||||

Relative Weight

||

Max Relationship
Technical Importance Rating

|||||

3

HOW MUCH: Target

5

3

Ⴜ
Ⴠ Ⴜ Ⴎ
Ⴠ Ⴜ Ⴠ Ⴜ
Ⴠ
Ⴎ Ⴎ Ⴠ
Ⴜ Ⴠ Ⴜ Ⴎ
Ⴜ Ⴠ Ⴜ
Ⴎ Ⴠ Ⴠ
Ⴎ Ⴠ
Ⴎ
Ⴜ Ⴠ
Ⴎ Ⴜ
Ⴠ
Ⴎ
Ⴜ Ⴠ Ⴜ Ⴜ
Ⴜ
Ⴜ Ⴜ Ⴎ
Ⴜ Ⴜ Ⴜ
Ⴎ
Ⴠ Ⴎ Ⴠ Ⴜ
Ⴎ Ⴎ
Ⴠ
Ⴎ Ⴎ
Ⴎ Ⴜ
Ⴠ
Ⴎ
Ⴎ
Ⴜ
Ⴠ Ⴜ
Ⴎ
Ⴎ Ⴎ Ⴎ
Ⴠ
Ⴜ
Ⴎ
Ⴠ Ⴎ Ⴎ
Ⴠ Ⴎ
Ⴎ Ⴎ
Ⴎ Ⴜ Ⴜ Ⴠ Ⴠ

0

1

2

3

4

11
Our Product
Competitor #1
Competitor #2
Competitor #3
Competitor #4

|||

||||||

||||||

Weight Chart

2

4

1

1

4

0

1

0

Competitor #1: Bearikade Weekender

2

3

2

5

3

1

2

1
3

Competitor #2: Garcia Backpacker's Cache

0

1

0

3

1

3

5

Competitor #3: Hunny Canister Bear Necessities

4

5

4

0

5

5

1

Competitor #4: Counter Assault

5

0

5

5

0

4

5

4

Competitor #5: Bear Vault

3

2

3

5

2

2

5

2

5

5

4

Our Product

3

Competitor #1
Competitor #2

2

Competitor #3

1

Competitor #4
Competitor #5

0

Current Product Assesment - Engineering Specifications

Our Product

Template Revision: 0.9

Column #

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

Christopher Battles

5

Row #

9

Competitor #5: Bear Vault

8

Competitor #4: Counter Assault

6

Competitor #3: Hunny Canister Bear Necessities

10

Competitor #2: Garcia Backpacker's Cache

8%

NOW: Current Product Assesment - Customer Requirements

Competitor #1: Bearikade Weekender

|||

11

Ⴍ

Cost

3

Ⴍ

Bear Minimum Bear Canister

[Maximum weight of 1.6 lbm]

Ⴘ

Void fraction

9

Ⴍ

[4%]

7

Ⴍ

$500

9

Ⴍ

Smallest fillet radius

10

10

Price to Volume Ratio [$/in ]

9%

9

Ⴍ

3

||||

+
8

.25 [ in]

2

7

.83 [$/in ]

3
[Volume of at least 650 in ]

6

Mass to Volume Ratio [lbm/in ]

9

Ⴃ

5

3

8

Ⴘ

Size (L [in] x D [in])

9

4

Size of Opening (D [in])

10

WHAT: Customer
Requirements (explicit &
implicit)

3

6.5 [in] (D)

Maximum Relationship

9%

Ⴍ

+

+

11 [in] x 9 [in] (L x D)

Avid Lightweight Backpacker

Avid Backpacker

||||

Ⴃ

Total Mass [lbm]

Nick Hellewell

HOW: Engineering
Specifications

Relative Weight

1

2

Internal Volume [in ]

Direction of Improvement

1

í
+

Max gap size (diameter [in])

+

WHO: Customers

Weight Chart

+

+
Column #

Row #

í

+

1.6 [lbm]

Target
Minimize

+

í
í

Ⴃ
Ⴘ
Ⴍ

650 [in ]

Maximize

í

í

Maximum time for lid removal [s]

Weak

30 [s]

Moderate

Ⴠ
Ⴜ
Ⴎ

.25 [in]

Strong

.01875 [lbm/in ]

Positive
Negative

Date: 4/23/2010

12
13
14

Appendix C: Hand Calculations (1/2)

Appendix C: Hand Calculations (2/2)

Appendix C: Canister Internal Pressure Calculation

Appendix D: Drawings of Nine Selected designs

Appendix E: Layout Drawings (1/2)

Appendix E: Layout Drawings (2/2)

Appendix F: Design Hazard Identification Checklist











"

!

















"

!

















"

!

















"

!

















"

!



















!& !)
.
/

!&& 
!&&

!!
!
 





 
 
 
 
 )
 .

/












&

&
)
 .
& *



&& &


&! 
)
&
(
 /
 
 
 
!
&&




!&
&
!& &)
.
/
!&&!







+

-
+

%
	

	

*,

(,

	


			 
	
		
	 !
"	#$	%"!
&	'	((
*(	+	(	,*+%"	&$	

+(	(	0$
#" 		

$	%

1"			 2	#(
	3
	$
	 4(	+	#(		("$
	(	
	'	
		
4	+	(
+,-. 

	


$"	5		#	
6	#($
	
	

/$
 	


%	7$	$	

	7$	$	
"-.

	
#8					
01

$			0$
		
			(
(	$	 42	
&$	 
#	2"	
		 	+98
"	&2	%		
	7$

$	
:	9(
	(		"(		
. 
		
	6(
#(	
%"(	$"				$	
"!
	9		(8					(8$
6	$

	,
:	9(

(	$
6	$
"
	.	+
2	03+4$ 
	 
'

3	+06	(	#($

		
 	 	$

	


-3

	


	

4
/%3

5!5




(,
	

%
+

%
(,

	
	

	
	
	
!(
!(
.	

	


!
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
!
)	
	
	
	
	
(

	

	
	
	

	
	

	
!
	
	
	
	

	
	


	
	

	
	
	
	









(,
+

(,
+
/,,*

.,+


"

		
		
	#	
		
	%"	
	+	)
+	 #	
"
!
	%"	
+	 %"	 
+	 +	 
#	#	
#	#	
)
"
!
%	%"	)
"
!
%	#	)
%	%"	)
%		

%		
%		

		
"
!) *
#	%	
#	#	/
%	%	 
%"	)%"	) 
)0	)
%"	)%"	)
%"	)+	.
)*)
)*)
%"	)%"	/)
%"	)%"	/)
)*)
%"	)%"	/)
%"	)%"	/)
%"	)%"	/)
%"	
%"	/)
)
%"	)%"	/)
%"	)%"	/)
)*)
%"	)%"	/)
%"	)%"	/)
%"	)%"	/)
 *)
 *)
%	 %"	/)
)) )
%"	)%"	)



#
$



01,
	

.,+

.,+

!





%
$
"



"


$



2

,

01,
(,







&
$



'
$
!


(,
2





!

(
$




!



)*
$

!





(+
$
"








&
$


!!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!

!"

!















"

!

















"

!

















"

!









 
 )
 .

*


 
 
 
 


 
)
 (
/
)
&
)
 )
& )&
)
)
)
&& ))
).
)/
.
&! (
.
.
.
.
.
.)

..
)
(*
)
*
) /
)
*
) /
) /
)&
*
)& *
)/)
)/.
) //
) 
) 
) 
.

*
!
/

/

/
)
/
.

/



+

-
+

%
	

	

*,

(,

 	 	0$
 		$
(	$	 	, -	
&#05	
/'6

0/'6

#;	(	6(
<9		#$	
+((	
		6(
$"	4	
$"	7=
	 
" 		 
#$			
$	 $
"		 
:	#($	+9(	,6	"	
"	+9		#(
" 	. 


	


3	%>	7	
%$
 	


#					(
	9(	$	$
9					
%.	 		


&(	+(=	 $
+(=	9	9
6"	$		9
%$
	'
+'#
&(	 $	 $
&(	
(	 $
&(		&
6"	69(		$"
%(	:
($			$
	?	 
!
.
##	(	@
.
&	
	
	%$
	 $	
	
	%$
.&
	

%	(
%	A$
%(	@
	@	%$
	%$
34	&	%$
'2		
	
%0$	
#$
+(	@
	0;	

9		34	%$
	0;		+(	 	

	


-3

	


	

4
/%3

5!5


"!

"

"

"

"

"

"

"

"

""



(,
	

%
+

%
(,

)	
	
	
	
!
	
	
	
	
	

	

	
	
	
&
&
	
	
	
	
&
&
	
&
	
	
&(
	
)
	
	
	
(
	
	
	
!
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
&!

	
&!
	
	
&!
&!









%"	)
) 
*)
%"	/)
)
%"	/)
%"	)
)
)

+	)

(,
+

(,
+
/,,*

.,+

0	)

%	) %	)
) 0	)

%"	)
%"	)
%"	/)
%"	/)
%"	)
%"	/)
%"	)
%"	)
%"	)

"
) *)

%"	)%"	)
%"	)%"	) 
%"	)%"	)
*) &)
*) &)
%"	/) 	)
%"	/) +	)
%"	/) 	)
%"	/) 	)
*) &) &
*) &)
%"	/) 	)
*) &)
%"	/) %	.)
%"	/) %	.)
"
&)&)
#	)%"	)
"
) )
#	) +	)
#	) %	)
#	) %	)
"
) )



#
$



01,
	

.,+

.,+

!



%
$
"



"


$



2

,

01,
(,







&
$



'
$
!


(,
2











!

(
$






!



)*
$

!







(+
$
"










&
$


Case Study: Composite Manufacturing Processes
Technical Report
November 18, 2016
ME 412
Fall 2016

Adam Eisenbarth

Author:
aeisenba@calpoly.edu

Professor:
Dr. Sthanu Mahadev
smahadev@calpoly.edu

Mechanical Engineering Department
California Polytechnic State University

Table of Contents
Table of Contents

1

1 Background and Report Overview
1.1 Overview
1.2 Senior Project Brief Background

2
2
3

2 Study of the Manufacturing Techniques
2.1 Overview
2.2 Vacuum Bagging
2.2.1 Overview
2.2.2 Advantages
2.2.3 Disadvantages
2.2.3 Effectiveness to Capture Contours
2.3 Bladder Molding
2.3.2 Advantages
2.3.3 Disadvantages
2.3.4 Comparison to Vacuum Bagging
2.3.5 Effectiveness to Capture Contours
2.4 Injection Molding
2.4.2 Advantages
2.4.3 Disadvantages
2.4.4 Comparison to Vacuum Bagging Manufacturing and Bladder Molding Manufacturing
2.4.5 Effectiveness to Capture Contours

5
5
5
5
6
6
6
7
8
8
8
9
9
10
10
11
11

3 Conclusion

11

4 References

12

1

1 Background and Report Overview
1.1 Overview
The investigation of composite manufacturing processes was limited to three processes. The
selected processes will be for thermoplastic and/or thermoset composites only. This is because the
purpose of this technical report is to investigate manufacturing options available at California Polytechnic
State University for a senior project. The senior project is to design a carbon fiber ultralight bear canister
for ultralight backpack camping. Because the project is only looking into composites with polymeric
matrices, due to availability and resources on campus, only thermoset and thermoplastic composite
manufacturing processes will be considered. Thermoset and thermoplastic composites refer to the type of
matrix in the composite, the load bearing component. The classification system of a composite matrix is
seen in Figure 1.

Figure 1. The flowchart shows where thermoplastic matrices appear in a breakdown of a
generic composite. Note that only the elements along the path to thermoset and
thermoplastic matrices have been broken down into subelements.
A thermoset composite matrix refers to a matrix that cures at a lower temperature than
thermoplastics. To give an insight into some of the characteristics of metallic, ceramic, and carbon
matrices, they are all considered only for high-temperature applications in an increasing temperature
order. This gives perspective to the low temperatures that a thermoset matrix will experience during
curing relative to some other composite matrix options. When curing, the thermoset matrix undergoes
polymerization and cross-linking with the aid of a hardening agent and heating. Once the curing process is
2

complete, the result is irreversible, which is not the case for thermoplastics. Thermoplastics can be
reheated, giving the composite flexibility similar to before the initial cure. When an already cured
thermoset matrix composite is reheated at temperatures near the curing temperature (typically around
250-300°F), the resin does not melt, but it decomposes thermally. The most commonly used thermoset
matrix materials are polyesters, epoxies, polyimides, and vinyl esters. [13]
Within thermoset manufacturing processes, there are an abundance of various manufacturing
processes. Depending on the application, certain manufacturing processes have advantages over others.
The two thermoset manufacturing processes that will be investigated will be vacuum bagging and bladder
molding. The thermoplastic manufacturing process that will be investigated will be injection molding.
These are three very common manufacturing processes which are all capable of being completed with Cal
Poly’s resources. The methods will be described in detail, pros and cons will be looked at, and the various
processes will compared to the one another.

1.2 Senior Project Brief Background
The senior project for which this case study is based on, is currently in the last phase of the
preliminary design stage. The product of interest is a composite bear canister attempting to weigh under
one pound. An initial design of the canister has been completed which lays out the functions of the
canister and also gives a rough idea of how each part will interface with the rest of the design. Note that
the detailed design of the project has not been completed. However, the design is at a far enough stage to
conduct a case study on manufacturing techniques for each part of the assembly. The proposed design of
the canister assembly can be seen in Figure 2.

Figure 2. A rendering in SolidWorks was completed for the preliminary design of the
ultralight bear canister.
3

An exploded layout drawing can also be seen in Appendix A. The layout drawing clearly shows
all of the parts in the assembly and how they will fit together. There are two functions of the canister for
which this report is concerned with. They are (1) how the two halves of the canister will attach to one
another and (2) how the two halves of the canister will lock with one another. The preliminary design, as
seen in Figure 2, will achieve these two functions. The mechanism responsible for the attachment and
locking of the canister is seen in Figure 3, and a description of the operation will be discussed in the next
paragraph.

Figure 3. The parts responsible for the attaching and locking mechanism are shown.
These parts will pose challenges during the manufacturing stage of the design
process.
Two protruding male pressure tabs on the top half of the canister will be compressed in the
normal direction and will then enter the L shaped channel. There will be interference between the channel
and the pressure tabs. The user will rotate the pressure tabs until they reach the cavities at the end of the
channel. Because the cavities are cut to a greater depth than the L shaped channel, the pressure tabs will
snap into the cavities providing the locking feature of the canister. To open the canister, the pressure tabs
will be pressed in, and the reverse motion will take place.
The brief description of the design and operation of the canister was merely introduced to give a
background before delving deeper into the study of possible manufacturing techniques for the parts. It is
important to understand how to canister operates

4

2 Study of the Manufacturing Techniques
2.1 Overview
For this attachment and locking mechanism to operate with minimal difficulty and effort, the
manufacturing of the parts has to be precise. For example, if the pressure tabs don’t exhibit the contours
accurately, the fit in the channels and cavities will not be adequate. This proposes a challenge because
capturing sharp contours is more difficult to achieve when using composite materials versus other
materials. The vacuum bagging, bladder molding, and injection molding manufacturing processes will be
discussed in sections 2.2, 2.3, and 2.4, respectively. The discussion will assess how effective each process
is at capturing sharp contours.

2.2 Vacuum Bagging
2.2.1 Overview
Vacuum bagging manufacturing utilizes an evacuated bag to pull a composite part onto the
desired mold shape. Because the part is being pulled around the mold, the mold is a positive mold. The
cure cycle takes place with the vacuum still in place so the part can become rigid around the mold.
Creating an airtight seal is a difficult task; many different components are required during the setup phase
to achieve this. A common setup system for a vacuum bagging process is shown in Figure 4.

Figure 4. A typical vacuum bagging layer composition shows the required materials and
orientation of the layers [2].
5

2.2.2 Advantages
By evacuating the system, the plies consolidate which significantly reduces voids as the matrix
goes through its chemical curing stages. The vacuum also lessens the likelihood of the fiber orientation to
shift during curing [1] [2]. Arguably the most important advantage of using a vacuum bagging
manufacturing process is the capability of optimizing the fiber-to-resin ratio. The fiber-to-resin ratio is
important because it gives the composite part its strength and stiffness characteristics. The fibers do not
display rigidity when in the textile state. Also, thermosetting resins, like epoxies, are quite brittle if cured
without reinforcement. If the resin makes up the majority of the laminate, the laminate will display
properties more representative of the resin. If too little resin exists, places where the fibers are dry will
cause weak spots. Vacuum bagging allows for a desired fiber-to-resin ratio by having the fibers saturated
with resin and “squeezing out” excess resin. With the use of an autoclave, the pressure can be vamped up
to two or three times atmospheric creating an even larger pressure difference. [2] By optimizing the
fiber-to-resin ratio, the strength to weight ratio of the laminate improves; without unnecessary resin in the
part, the composite will be lighter.

2.2.3 Disadvantages
There is an asterix next to the word optimize when talking about the fiber-to-resin ratio. There are
many factors which determine what that ratio will end of being for the composite part. These factors are
often hard to control such as the amount of resin used at the beginning. If the fibers are saturated with no
excess resin, the fiber-to-resin ratio will be more desirable from a strength-to-weight ratio perspective
than if the fibers are saturated and there is extra resin. Another factor deals with the timing of the vacuum
pressure being applied. Other disadvantages come into play when looking at the logistical side of the
process. When the excess resin is removed, resources are wasted. On large-scale projects, a larger labor
team is required to take care of the layup. The layup process has a time limit, especially if the resin cures
at temperatures around room temperature. [3]

2.2.3 Effectiveness to Capture Contours
For vacuum bagging, capturing contours effectively does not have a yes or no answer. The ability
to do this depends on the location of the contours, the geometry relative to the rest of the part, and the
laminate material and ply number and orientation. For example, if sharp contours are protruding out of a
convex surface, such as the pressure tabs off the internal ring of the bear canister, the contours are capable
of being captured effectively. There will be some fillet effect at the base of the sharp edge. During
research, the capability for vacuum bagging to capture complex geometries was not discussed much.
Figure 5 shows an example of how capable a vacuum bagging manufacturing process is for capturing
contours. It is suffice to say that capturing contours using this process is neither an advantage or a
disadvantage.

6

Figure 5. (Left) The sample mold is shown. Capturing the sawtooth contours of the four
components on the part will be observed. (Middle) The vacuum bag layup is
shown. (Right) The composite part features distinct contours. The results show
that protruding contours from a part can be captured effectively using a
vacuum bagging technique [6].

2.3 Bladder Molding
2.3.1 Overview
Bladder molding is a viable option when a composite part is manufactured using a negative mold.
A negative mold consists of a cavity in which the composite material, pre-cure, is placed into and pressed
to fit the cavity as best as possible. A bladder, typically made of silicone, or another elastomer, is then
placed inside the cavity and composite. Air pressure is supplied to the bladder inflating it like a balloon.
This pressure creates a force which further presses the composite piece into the mold, creating a better
part according to the desired shape. The part is then cured in this manner to give the composite its rigidity,
strength properties, and stiffness properties. For the senior project, the canister body was manufactured
using a bladder molding process. A photo taken after the curing process, but with the bladder still in the
mold is shown in Figure 6.

7

Figure 6. The green bladder was made of silicone. Pressure was applied through a sealing
device (photo is after device was taken off) to press the carbon fiber into the
mold.

2.3.2 Advantages
Unlike vacuum bagging, bladder molding does not involve removal of resin. This can be both an
advantage and a disadvantage. From the viewpoint of being wasteful of money and resources, this is an
advantage. To make a part with an appropriate fiber-to-resin ratio (about 60% [2]), the option of using a
prepreg composite material is an option. Prepreg composites have the resin pre-impregnated into the fiber
textile. When a prepreg composite is used, the fiber-to-resin ratio can be selected when ordering your
composite material. Most preprerg composites contain around a 65% fiber-to-resin ratio [4]. Because the
part is being pressed into Other advantages include: “Bladder molding is used for parts that either have
complex geometry, strict cosmetic requirements, tight outside tolerances or a combination of all three.”
[16]

2.3.3 Disadvantages
A disadvantage to bladder molding is the mold manufacturing process is more complex than other
typical thermoplastic manufacturing processes, often increasing the time and money invested in the
project. For a consistent pressure forcing the part against the mold, a bladder which accurately represents
the shape of the part is required. This might suggest the means for a custom professionally made bladder
meaning a more expensive manufacturing process.

2.3.4 Comparison to Vacuum Bagging
Because bladder molding is pressing the part into the mold versus pulling the part around the
mold, the outside of the part is either up firmly against the mold or the inside is up against the mold,
respectively. This means that the surface finish for a bladder molding manufacturing process will most
likely be better. Also, due to this fact, manufacturing is the little to no need for post processing your part.

8

The selection of either using vacuum bagging or bladder molding is not based on the surface
finish or amount of post-processing. These are just byproducts of which process is selected. When
choosing between the two, vacuum bagging versus bladder molding is dependent on the application.
When a hollow part is desired, bladder molding is preferable to fill the cavity of the negative mold. For a
part with convex and protruding geometries, vacuum bagging is effective to capture the shape: the main
determining factor is the geometry of your part. Another consideration is the type of mold you are using.
Depending on what resources are available, one of the two mold types, positive or negative, might not be
available.

2.3.5 Effectiveness to Capture Contours
According to Rock West Composites, bladder molding is an effective way to capture composite
contours. The reason why is because a lot higher pressures can be achieved during a bladder molding
process (at pressures around 100 psi) than vacuum bagging. This allows the composite part to be pressed
up firmly against contours in the mold. For the senior project at hand, capturing the contours of the
attachment-locking mechanism may be achievable with a bladder molding process. The challenges faced,
if this process is selected, would be the molding manufacturing. Most likely the mold manufacturing
process would go as such: a negative mold would be made from HDF. A positive plaster mold would be
made from the cavity in the HDF. A third step in the mold process would be made from tooling carbon
fiber to create another female mold. Once this female mold is created, the bladder molding process would
be an option.

2.4 Injection Molding
2.4.1 Overview
Injection molding composite parts is very similar to injection molding plastic parts. The
procedures are the same; the only difference is in the fact that composites are used for composite injection
molding. Typically, short fiber thermoplastic composites, such as chopped glass fibers with nylon, are
used [7]. It is also common to combine the short fiber composites with an injected mold plastic process.
This creates a part with a lower strength to weight ratio; however, is a great method for increasing
accuracy and decreasing cost. A schematic showing the injection molding process is shown in Figure 7.

9

Figure 7. The composite (-plastic combination typically) goes through a similar process
as plastic injection molding where the part is heated to allow formation and
shaped around a tool.

2.4.2 Advantages
For commercial applications, injection molding composite parts have a competitive price per part.
When the scale is not quite at commercial, the cost of the manufacturing the molds has a higher impact,
therefore meaning it is more expensive per part. Also, at a commercial scale, parts have the ability to have
very high production rates. Another important advantage is the high levels of precision which are possible
with injection molding. The use of short fiber composites can be advantageous or disadvantageous
depending on the function of the part. This is discussed more in section 2.4.3.

2.4.3 Disadvantages
The one main disadvantage for injection molding short fiber thermoplastic composites is the
lower strength and stiffness characteristics when compared to plies of long fibers. Because the short fibers
are randomly oriented and short, the anisotropic material will not give as strong of a mechanical response
as long fiber composites. This is very important depending on the application. If the direction and
magnitude of the load being applied is known, then injection molding with short fiber composites may not
be strong enough for the job. With that being said, the randomly oriented short fibers can also work to the
part’s advantage. If the loading direction is unknown or is in multiple directions, the short fibers can
respond in a more consistent manner with respect to the orientation of the loading.
Another very important disadvantage to a short fiber injection mold manufacturing process is the
high potential for void formation. In a study discussed in Void Formation In Short-fiber Thermoplastic
Composites, voids tend to nucleate at fiber ends, and their content depends on processing conditions, fiber
concentration, and fiber length [9]. In an injection molding process the presence of voids can be decreased
by cooling the material under pressure. Another factor playing an important role in void formation is the
cooling rate. After the injection mold process, the melt is cooled, and external surface layers solidify first,
which leads to internal voiding [9]. To decrease the effects, slower cooling rates can be implemented in
the process.

2.4.4 Comparison to Vacuum Bagging Manufacturing and Bladder Molding Manufacturing
Injection molding can capture contours better than the other two processes. Because thermoplastic
short fiber composites are used instead of thermosets, the composite part will be less strong and less stiff
in the loading direction. In a randomly loaded case, the thermoset with the short fiber composites will
respond better mechanically. Injection molding will create a part that is heavier due to the typical
combination of the composite with plastic. All of these are important considerations when selecting a
composite manufacturing process for a given application.

10

2.4.5 Effectiveness to Capture Contours
Out of the three manufacturing processes looked into, injection molding is the most effective for
capturing contours. Complex shapes can be captured to a high degree of accuracy. Figure 8 shows an
example of a parts where sharp contours are captured effectively by an injection molding process.

Figure 8. Geometries of most shapes and sizes are capable of being produced with an
injection molding manufacturing process [8].

3 Conclusion
For the senior project attachment-locking mechanism, an injection molding process would be the
best choice. To enable the canister to operate will optimum functionality, the sharp contours will be
necessary to capture. Injection molding gives this option. The strength of the parts would be jeopardized;
however, because the parts are internal to a strong canister body, the strength is not too much of a
concern. Future challenges include: making the parts lightweight with the plastic-short fiber composite
combination, minimizing cost for a non -commercial application, and manufacturing the molds for the
injection molding process.

4 References
[1]

Staff. "Fabrication Methods." The Online Magazine of High Performance Composites and
Composites Technology : CompositesWorld. N.p., n.d. Web. 18 Nov. 2016.

[2]

"Learning Center - Vacuum Bagging Equipment & Techniques for Room-Temp
Applications." Fibre Glast. N.p., n.d. Web. 18 Nov. 2016.

[3]

"Vacuum Bagging Process." Vacuum Bagging Process - German Advanced Composites.
11

N.p., n.d. Web. 18 Nov. 2016.
[4]

"Learning Center - About Prepregs." Fibre Glast. N.p., n.d. Web. 18 Nov. 2016.

[5]

"Bladder Molding." Bladder Molding - Manufacturing Processes - Custom. N.p., n.d. Web.
18 Nov. 2016.

[6]

Rogers, Eli, Naveen Beasly, Cory Wilson, and Donald Wood. Ulta-Light Bear Canister.
Tech. N.p.: n.p., n.d. Print.

[7]

"Injection Molding : CompositesWorld." Injection Molding : CompositesWorld. N.p., n.d.
Web. 18 Nov. 2016.

[8]

"Services | Composite Injection Molding | Plastiques Gagnon." Plastiques Gagnon. N.p.,
n.d. Web. 18 Nov. 2016.

[9]

Vaxman, A.; Narkis, M.; Siegmann, A.; Kenig, S. (1989). "Void formation in short-fiber
thermoplastic composites". Polym Compos. 10: 449–453. doi:10.1002/pc.750100609.

12

Appendix L
List of Drawings and Specification Sheets of Ordered Parts
_____________________________________________________________________________________
1.0.0 - Exploded Final Assembly
1.1.0 - Half Canister Body
1.2.0 - Half Canister Body with Holes
1.3.0 - Stiffening Ring Assembly
1.3.1 - Stiffening Ring
*1.3.2 - Low Strength Steel Nuts 4-40
*1.3.3 - Velcro® Brand Tape Strips
*1.3.4 - 18-8 Stainless Steel Knob 4-40 Ǫ” Long
1.4.0 - *Elastic Net

2.0.0 - Exploded Stiffening Ring Mold Assembly
2.1.0 - Top Piece of Mold
2.2.0 - Centerpiece of Mold
2.3.0 - Base Piece of Mold
3.0.0 - Half Canister Mold

*Ordered parts
1/19

FORMULA SAE TESTING DATA 2016-2017

Material Testing - 10/04/2016
Fiber Type: M46J

Unidirectional 12k

Resin System:
TC250
p
Factor*:

75 psi
Cure Pressure :
13 psi
Cure Pressure :
Elastic Properties

0.48

1
29.72
0.49
0.21
-

2
29.17
3.05
0.47
0.22
-

Flex Modulus

24.04

21.25

3
34.52
0.8
0.59
0.16
-

7447 7588 8261.2
2988.61
4796 26253 24378
221.4 221.4
274.1
2.62
2.22
7.93
10.26
9.04
9.54
9.33
9.13
9.45
10

ILSS
Flex Strength

265 °F

62 %

Fiber Volume:

lb/in

Experiment
Number
E1
E2
G12
G23
ʆ12
ʆ23

e1t
e2t
e1c
e2c
e12
F1t
F2t
F1c
F2c
F12

Cure Temp:

164.8

4
24.24
0.75
0.25
-

5
30.13
0.81
0.45
0.32
-

6
27.63
0.45
0.14
-

7
25.99
0.42
0.28
-

Fiber Areal Weight:
Fiber Density:

0.00035
0.0647 lb/in3

Average
28.771429 msi
0.7866667 msi
0.4783333 msi
0.2103387 msi
0.2257143
0.87
-

SI units
198372 MPa
5423.88 MPa
3297.99 MPa
1450.23 MPa
0.22571
0.87
-

22.645 msi

156132 MPa

Failure Properties
8028.8 7659.2 7908 8127 7859.9714 ʅɸ
2569.1 4328
3295.25 ʅɸ
3807.1737 ʅɸ
1596.1367 ʅɸ
26508 25679 17795 24122.66 ʅɸ
192.3
229.4 218.7 210.2 223.92857 ksi
2.26 3.76
2.88 ksi
108.4654 ksi
1.395 ksi
8.01
7.35
7.1
8.13 ksi
9.34
8.95
9.31
8.65
9.415 ksi
10
10.24

7859.97
3295.25
3807.17
1596.14
24122.7
1543.93
19.8569
747.843
9.61819
56.0544

ʅɸ
ʅɸ
ʅɸ
ʅɸ
ʅɸ
MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa
MPa

64.9142 MPa

158.53 ksi

152.2

2

1093.03 MPa

Physical Properties
Thickness (calculated)
Thickness (@ 75 psi)
Thickness (@ 13 psi)

0.008687 in
0.007974 in
0.0114896 in

0.22065 mm
0.20254 mm
0.29184 mm
3

3
0.066 lbm/in ####### kg/m
2
lbf*s /i
3
Abaqus
1.72E-04 4
1.84E-03 ton/mm
n
*: Compression Reduction Factor from Datasheet by comparing tensile and compressive strength properties
Notes:
Exp A seems like low failure load for 45 test
Exp D has weird noise at high loads for 45 test
For E2/F2/e2t testing: Cure Temp. 250°F - 90 min hold / Pressure 13 psi
G23 not tested - data from datasheet

Density

0DWHULDOV(TXLSPHQW

&DOLSHUVIRUPHDVXUHPHQW
YHULILFDWLRQ

&RQILUPDWLRQ

&RQILUPDWLRQ

0XVWEHZLWKLQ
'HVLJQWROHUDQFHVPXVW
DFFHSWDEOHWROHUDQFHV
EHGHWHUPLQHGDFFXUDWHO\
ZKLFKZLOOEH
EHIRUHWHVWLQJ
GHWHUPLQHGODWHU
0XVWEHZLWKLQ
'HVLJQWROHUDQFHVPXVW
DFFHSWDEOHWROHUDQFHV
EHGHWHUPLQHGDFFXUDWHO\
ZKLFKZLOOEH
EHIRUHWHVWLQJ
GHWHUPLQHGODWHU

QD

7KHILQDOFRQILUPDWLRQSURWRW\SHZLOO
(19/LYHEHDUWHVWL EHILOOHGZLWKIRRGDQGWHVWHGZLWKD
OLYHEHDUIRURQHKRXURIH[SRVXUH





'URSZHLJKWHGFDQLVWHULQUDQGRP
RULHQWDWLRQVRQWRYDULRXVURFN\DQG
URXJKVXUIDFHV

865'URSRU
3XQFWXUHDFFLGHQWO\

0DWHULDOVIRUEXUQWHVW
PXVWEHDTXLUHG6DIHW\
SURFHGXUHVPXVWEH
GHWHUPLQHGEHIRUH
WHVWLQJZLWKKD]DUGRXV
PDWHULDOV

1RFUDFNV
3URSHUZLHJKWRILQ
0HWDO+ROHSXQFKGHYLFH
GHODPLQDWLRQRU
2QDORFDO
FDQLVWHUPXVWEH
&DPHUDPDWHULDOVDPSOHV
EXUVWLQJPD[
WUDLORUURFN\
GHWHUPLQHGZLWKDOLEHUDO
PHDVXULQJWDSHEDFNSDFNIRU
GHIOHFWLRQVPXVWEHOHVV
VXUIDFH
IDFWRURIVDIHW\
WUDQVSRUWDWLRQ
WKDQ
6DQ'LHJR
&DQLVWHUPXVWQRWIDLO
GXULQJWHVWLQJWLPH
=RRRU
%ODFN%URZQ*UL]]O\%HDU
)LQDOWHVW
<HOORZVWRQH
SHULRG

9RLGFRQWHQWOHVVWKDQ


9LVXDOLQVSHFWLRQ
9LVXDOLQVSHFWLRQZLOOEH
VKRZVQRQRWLFDEOH
FRPSOHWHGE\PXOWLSOH
GLSVXQFRQIRUPLWLHVRU
HQJLQHHUVWRYHULI\
IODZVZLWKDFFRUGDQFH
UHVXOWV
WRWKHPROG
\S
EHGHWHUPLQHGEHIRUH
1RFUDFNV
WHVWLQJZLWKKHDY\
GHODPLQDWLRQRU
ZHLJKWV$KLJKVSHHG
2QFDPSXV
EXUVWLQJPD[
FDPHUDPLJKWEHGHVLUHG
ODEV
GHIOHFWLRQVPXVWEHOHVV
WRDQDO\]HPHFKDQLFDO
WKDQ
UHVSRQVHRIFDQLVWHU

QD

&RQILUPDWLRQ

&RQILUPDWLRQ

&RQILUPDWLRQ

&RQILUPDWLRQ

&RQILUPDWLRQ

&RQILUPDWLRQ

&RQILUPDWLRQ

6WUXFWXUDO

,IDPSOHWHVWULQJVDUH
5HVXOWVZLOOEHXVHGWR SURGXFHGFRPSUHVVLRQ
WHVWVFRXOGJRXQWLO
JHWDVWUHVVVWUDLQFXUYH
IDLOXUH

&RPSRVLWHV
/DE

QD

6WUXFWXUDO

7HVW6WDJH>@

$OOFRQVLGHUHGPDWHULDOV
IRUWKHULQJVZLOOEH
5HVXOWVZLOOEH
WHVWHGZLWKWKHWZLOO
FRPSDUHGWRORDGV
&RPSRVLWHV UHSUHVHQWDWLYHRIDEHDU ZHDYHFDUERQILEHU7KLV
ZLOOEHDPDLQ
DQGDOVRRWKHU
/DE
FRQVLGHUDWLRQZKHQ
DGKHVLYHVIRUWKHVDPH
VHOHFWLQJWKHPDWHULDOIRU
WZRPDWHULDOV
WKHULQJV

1RWHV

6WUXFWXUDO

$FFHSWDQFH&ULWHULD>@

7HVW
5HVSRQVLELOLW\
>@

,IDPSOHFDQLVWHUKDOYHV
DUHSURGXFHG
5HVXOWVZLOOEHXVHGWR
JHWDVWUHVVVWUDLQFXUYH FRPSUHVVLRQWHVWVFRXOG
JRXQWLOIDLOXUH

&RPSRVLWHV
/DE

/RFDWLRQ

+LJKVSHHGFDPHUDZHLJKWV
PHDVXULQJWDSHGLVWDQFH
'URSWHVWRIOEIURPIWKLJKRQ EDFNGURSRUUHIHUHQFHVKHHWIRU
KLJKVSHHGVDIHW\HTXLSPHQW
WRSDQGERWWRPDQGYDULRXVVLGHV
URSHRUVWULQJWRGURSZHLJKW
ZLWK
$FLGVFDOHIRUVDPSOHZHLJKW
OLGH\HSURWHFWLRQRYHQRU
SDSHUWRZHOVWRGU\VDPSOH
&RPSRVLWHV
$FLGGLJHVWLRQWHVWWRFKHFN
FDOLSHUVWRPHDVXUHGLPLQVLRQV
/DE
FRPSRVLWHYRLGFRQWHQW3RURVLW\
HQVXUHUHODWLYHO\HTXDOVDPSOH
GHQVLWLHV&RPSRVLWHVDPSOHV
RIYDULRXVQXPEHURIOD\HUV



(19%HDUVWULNHV
FDQLVWHU
(19%HDUMXPSV
RQFDQLVWHU
(19%HDUUROOV
FDQLVWHURIIFOLII

0)*&DUERQGRHV
3RVWDQO\VLVE\LQVSHFWLRQWRYHULI\
QRWFRQIRUPWR
FDQLVWHUKDVFRQIRUPHGWRPROGVKDSH
PROGVKDSH

&RPSUHVVLRQWHVWLQJWRUHFRUGWKH
'61)RUFH
HODVWLFUHVSRQVHRIWKHFDQLVWHU
GHIOHFWLRQWHVWIRUD
7HVWLQJXQWLOSODVWLFGHIRUPDWLRQ
,QVWRQ0RGHOWHVWIL[WXUH
FDUERQILEHUKDOI
ZRXOGEHSUHIHUUDEOHWRJHWWKHOLPLWV
FDQLVWHU
RIWKHHODVWLFUHJLPH
'615LQJDQG
$GKHVLYHSXOORXWVWUHQJWKWHVWVWKH
FDQLVWHUKDOI
WZRPDWHULDOVEHLQJWHVWHGZLOOEH
DGKHVLRQPXVWEH
,QVWRQ0RGHOFODPSV
IXOO\DGKHUHGXVLQJWKHDGKHVLRQ
VWURQJHQRXJKWR
IRUFHJDXJHPDWHULDO
SURGXFWRIFKRLFH$QH[WHUQDOKRRN
VWD\ERQGHGZKHQ
PHDVXULQJWDSHODWFKLQJWR
RUSXOOLQJGHYLFHZLOOEHDWWDFKHGWR
H[SHULHQFLQJDORDG
VDPSOHULQJWLHGRZQULQJ
RQHRIWKHPDWHULDOVDQGSXOOHGXQWLO
UHSUHVHQWDWLYHRID
ERQGEUHDNV
EHDUDWWDFN
&RPSUHVVLRQWHVWLQJWRUHFRUGWKH
'61)RUFH
HODVWLFUHVSRQVHRIWKHFDQLVWHU
GHIOHFWLRQWHVWIRU
7HVWLQJXQWLOSODVWLFGHIRUPDWLRQ
,QVWRQ0RGHOWHVWIL[WXUH
WKHPDOHDQG
ZRXOGEHSUHIHUUDEOHWRJHWWKHOLPLWV
IHPDOHULQJV
RIWKHHODVWLFUHJLPH
0)*+ROHVLQ
3RVWDQO\VLVE\LQVSHFWLRQXVLQJ
KDOIFDQLVWHUERG\
FDOLSHUVWRPHDVXUHDQGYHULI\WKH
&DOLSHUVIRUPHDVXUHPHQW
DUHQRWLQOLQHZLWK WROHUDQFHEHWZHHQWKHQRWFKHVDQG
YHULILFDWLRQ
KROHVLQVWLIIHQLQJ FKDQQHORSHQLQJVLVZLWKLQDFFHSWDEOH
ULQJ
GHVLJQWROHUDQFH
3RVWDQO\VLVE\LQVSHFWLRQXVLQJ
0)*,QWHUIHUHQFH
EHWZHHQFDQLVWHU
FDOLSHUVWRPHDVXUHDQGYHULI\WKH
&DOLSHUVIRUPHDVXUHPHQW
ERG\DQGJURRYH
WROHUDQFHEHWZHHQWKHQRWFKHVDQGWKH
YHULILFDWLRQ6DQGSDSHU
GRHVQRWDOORZ
FKDQQHOVLVZLWKLQDFFHSWDEOHGHVLJQ
DWWDFKPHQW
WROHUDQFH

7HVW'HVFULSWLRQ>@

0)*/DUJH
SRURVLW\



















,WHP 6SHFLILFDWLRQRU
1R &ODXVH5HIHUHQFH>@



&DUERQ
)LEHU

4XDQWLW\ 7\SH>@

6DPSOHV7HVWHG

*URXS%HDU0LQLPXP'HVLJQ9DOLGDWLRQ3ODQDQG5HSRUW
7(673/$1



6WDUWGDWH

6:

6:

6:

6:

6:

6:

6:

6:

6:

::

::



)LQLVKGDWH

7LPLQJ

)DLOXUH/RDG
OE)DLOXUH
'HIOHFWLRQ
LQ

7HVW5HVXOW
>@


4XDQWLW\3DVV

7HVW5HVXOWV



4XDQWLW\
)DLO

7KHSDUWZDV
WHVWHGXQWLO
IDLOXUH

1RWHV$VVLJQHG
HQJLQHHU

7(675(3257

Appendix L

2/19

Appendix L

4/19

Appendix L

5/19

Appendix L

7/19

Appendix L

6/19

Appendix L

8/19

Appendix L

9/19

Appendix L

10/19

Appendix L

11/19

Appendix L

12/19

Appendix L

13/19

TECHNICAL
DATA SHEET
No. CFA-015

®

M46J DATA SHEET
MJ type high modulus fiber with enhanced tensile and compressive strength over
M series fibers. Mainly used for premium sporting goods, aerospace, and industrial
applications.
F I B E R

P R O P E R T I E S
English

Tensile Strength
Tensile Modulus
Strain
Density
Filament Diameter
Yield

611
63.3
1.0
0.066
2.0E-04

6K
12K

Sizing Type
& Amount

Metric

ksi
Msi
%
lbs/in 3
in.

4,210
436
1.0
1.84
5

6,679 ft/lbs
3,347 ft/lbs
50A, 50B

223 g/1000m
445 g/1000m
1.0 %

Twist

TY-030B-01
TY-030B-01
TY-030B-01
TY-030B-02

TY-030B-03
TY-030B-03
TY-030B-05

Twisted, Untwisted

F U N C T I O N A L

P R O P E R T I E S

CTE
Specific Heat
Thermal Conductivity
Electric Resistivity
Chemical Composition: Carbon
Na + K

C O M P O S I T E

MPa
GPa
%
g/cm 3
µm

Test Method

-0.9
0.17
0.202
0.9
>99
<50

α⋅10 -6 /˚C
Cal/g⋅˚C
Cal/cm⋅s⋅˚C
x 10 -3 Ω⋅cm
%
ppm

P R O P E R T I E S *

Tensile Strength
Tensile Modulus
Tensile Strain

320 ksi
38.5 Msi
0.8 %

2,210 MPa
265 GPa
0.8 %

ASTM D-3039
ASTM D-3039
ASTM D-3039

Compressive Strength
Flexural Strength
Flexural Modulus

155 ksi
210 ksi
32.0 Msi

1,080 MPa
1,420 MPa
220 GPa

ASTM D-695
ASTM D-790
ASTM D-790

ILSS
90˚ Tensile Strength

11.5 ksi
7.0 ksi

8 kgf/mm 2
47 MPa

ASTM D-2344
ASTM D-3039

* To r a y 2 5 0 ˚ F E p o x y R e s i n . N o r m a l i z e d t o 6 0 % f i b e r v o l u m e .

TORAY

CARBON

FIBERS

AMERICA,

INC.

M46J
C O M P O S I T E

P R O P E R T I E S * *

Tensile Strength
Tensile Modulus
Tensile Strain

315 ksi
35.5 Msi
0.8 %

2,160 MPa
245 GPa
0.8 %

Compressive Strength
Compressive Modulus

145 ksi
33.0 Msi

980 MPa
225 GPa

In-Plane Shear Strength
ILSS
90˚ Tensile Strength

8.5 ksi
12.0 ksi
6.5 ksi

ASTM D-3039
ASTM D-3039
ASTM D-3039
ASTM D-695
ASTM D-695

59 MPa
8.5 kgf/mm 2
45 MPa

ASTM D-3518
ASTM D-2344
ASTM D-3039

** Toray Semi-Toughened 350˚F Epoxy Resin. Normalized to 60% fiber volume.
See Section 4 for Safety & Handling information. The above properties do not constitute any warranty or guarantee of values.
These values are for material selection purposes only. For applications requiring guaranteed values, contact our sales and technical team
to establish a material specification document.

P A C K A G I N G
The table below summarizes the tow sizes, twists, sizing types, and packaging available
for standard material. Other bobbin sizes may be available on a limited basis.
Tow
Sizes

Twist1

Sizing

Bobbin
Net
Weight

Bobbin
Type2

(kg)

6K
12K

a

b

c

d

e

Spools
per
Case

Bobbin Size

(mm)

Case
Net
Weight
(kg)

A

50A

1.0

II

76

82

192

126

156

16

16

B

50B

1.0

II

76

82

192

126

156

16

16

B

50B

2.0

II

76

82

192

157

156

12

24

1 Twist
A: Twisted yarn
B: Untwisted yarn made from a twisted yarn through an untwisting process
2 Bobbin Type See Diagram below

T Y P E

TORAY

I

CARBON

T Y P E

II

FIBERS

C: Never twisted yarn

T Y P E

III

AMERICA,

INC.

6 H u t t o n C e n t r e D r i v e , S u i t e # 1 2 7 0 , S a n t a A n a , C A 9 2 7 0 7 T E L : ( 7 1 4 ) 4 3 1 - 2 3 2 0 FA X : ( 7 1 4 ) 4 2 4 - 0 7 5 0
S a l e s @ To r a y c f a . c o m Te c h n i c a l @ To r a y c f a . c o m w w w . t o r a y u s a . c o m

Finite Element Analysis of an Ultra-Light Composite Bear Canister
FEA Project Report
Rama Adajian
radajian@calpoly.edu
December 9, 2016

ME/BMED 404 – 71
Tuesday & Thursday 8-11am Lab
Fall 2016

Mechanical Engineering Department
California Polytechnic State University
San Luis Obispo, California

1. Abstract
The Bear Minimum is a senior project that is attempting to design the lightest bear canister on the
market by utilizing composite materials. The ultimate goal is to create a carbon fiber and
composite bear canister for lightweight backpackers. Our project is a continuation of a senior
project from 2015 which designed the body for the canister, but did not design a lid or locking
mechanism. The canister must sport an internal volume of 600in3 and withstand the force of a
100lbm mass dropped from 1ft on the side or top of it simulating the force of a grizzly bear rolling
or pouncing on the canister as seen in figure 1.
Top Load Case

Side Load Case

Figure 1. Live bear showing top and side loading cases
Last year the a senior project team made the canister body but no lid. During the drop test
the canister broke on the end where there was no lid, but stayed intact on the bottom where the
hoop stress was allowed to propagate to the other side of the canister and be distributed. To pass
the loading case tests there must be no visible cracks and the deflection must be under 0.25in for
both cases. The team last year passed the vertical loading test, but the side deflection failed at a
deflection of almost 0.5 inches.
The lightweight backpacking community is eagerly awaiting a lighter and stronger canister
on the market. It is not uncommon for backpackers to go to great lengths to save weight, even if
that means using their trekking poles as tent poles. While money is usually a concern for consumer
products, the lightweight backpacking community will spend large amounts of money for
lightweight products and canisters. This allows us to use expensive, but superior, materials such
as carbon fiber.

2. Introduction & Background
Our task is to create a lid that integrates easily into the existing canister body and acts like
a structural element. The canister locking assembly (body and lid) must pass the drop test and
deflection requirements. The drop test represents a grizzly or black bear pouncing or rolling the
canister as seen in the previous section loading cases. This is important as the canister must
withstand the bear to not allow the food to be exposed. If the bear penetrates the canister the

backpackers food is lost, and more critically, the bear will learn that humans carry food around
and actively seek backpackers for food. This is a contact situation bears and backpackers would
both negatively benefit from.
Additionally, we also want to ensure the canister can withstand an internal pressure of
26psi if the internal hot air was to expand. We do not want the canister to fail and explode on the
user under any circumstance. While manufacturing the canister, the composite was exposed to an
internal pressure of 30 psi and did not yield. This is excellent news for the design as it passes the
pressure requirements, but we would like to prove that the theoretical case also withstands the
pressure. In summary, our main two questions in this investigation are as follows:
1. Will the canister withstand the equivalent force of a 100lbf weight being dropped on
the male and female latching rings without deflecting more than 0.25 inches?
2. Will the canister not yield or excessively deflect (<0.25 inches which allows ring to
keep adhered to canister wall) and not harm the user if the canister is pressurized up to
26 psia?
3. Model Development
The model is based off our selected design from our Bear Minimum senior project. The geometry
was created in SolidWorks to allow for easy dimension manipulation. Once the team had created
our desired geometry then it was exported to an. IGES file and then imported into Abaqus. The
part was designed with simplicity and ease of manufacturing in mind. All of the part features are
common shapes such as circles and squares. This allows for easy manufacturing as stock parts and
simple tooling geometry can be used. Due to this simplistic design approach I did not have to
modify the part geometry before importing into Abaqus.
One common technique utilized in FEA is to run analyses on a quarter or half model based on
planes of symmetry. Unfortunately, although it appears are model is symmetric on one plane, it is
not. Our selected locking design utilizes a twist-to-lock mechanism which requires two sliding
channels. These channels extend in the clockwise direction, seen in figure 2 , which means there
is no plane of symmetry. However, if four channel locks are used (spaced 90 degrees apart) then
analysis could be done on a quarter model.

Figure 2. Wire mesh reveals there are no valid planes of symmetry.

Materials
The knowns about the system are the material used, properties, and dimensions. We know
that the material is a prepreg carbon fiber epoxy matrix. More specifically the epoxy and carbon
composite is Cytec 5320-1t650 which information on can be found at:
https://www.cytec.com/sites/default/files/datasheets/CYCOM%205320-1%20Rev%20CR5.pdf).
It weighs 1.31 grams per cubic centimeter density has a poisons ratio of 0.3 and the laminate layers
(4 layers) combined to a modulus of 1015241 Psi, which was derived from the previous year’s
senior project report.
The ring material was modeled as short fiber isotropic composite which was compression
molded. This was one ideal material the senior project team believes the rings can be
manufactured from at Cal poly. The ring materials for each of the parts are as follows:
Materials:
- Short fiber Material for Rings:
o E = 34.1 Msi = 34.1E6 Psi
o Poisson’s Ratio v = 0.33
-

Laminate Material for Body:
o E1 = 1,015,241 psi for both E1 and E2 v = 0.30
o E2 = 1,015,241 psi
o Poisson’s Ratio v = 0.30

Geometry Preparation

To prepare the ring portions for loads and boundary
conditions the rings had to have partition made for the
pressure and fixing boundary conditions to be applied.
The partitions were made using the create partition
command window and the Used shortest path between
two points option on the face of the ring. The partition is
used as the surface for the boundary conditions in the
section below to be applied on.

Boundary Conditions
Using the curved edge partition normal to 2 points, pinned boundary conditions were applied to
one side of the rings for both the male and female rings as seen in figure 3 This pinned condition
allowed the canister to not move in the three directions, but allowed free rotation. This simulates
the canister being pinned to the ground from a bear pouncing on it. The canister would be pressed
and fixed to the ground, but allowed to rotate, thus, U1 = U2 = U3 = 0. Earlier attempts to use
encastre boundary condition resulted in model failure as Abaqus was unable to find a solution.

Figure 3. Boundary condition of pinned surface for both male and female rings
The rings are uniquely pinned to the ground for their loading cases, however, for the
entire canister under pressure, the fixed portion would be the base of the canister seen in figure 4
below. Instead of selecting the entire base surface, only a few points were selected which
restricts the model less and allows expansion of that face in the vertical direction if needed. This
meant that only U1 = 0, and U3 = 0 for this boundary condition.

Figure 4. Boundary condition of pinned surface entire pressurized canister
Loads:
Loading for the models were created based on numbers form
our senior project. For the rings, a load of 5000lbf was
calculated. This was based off an impact of a 100lbf weight
dropped from 1 foot high and impacting for a maximum
distance of 0.25 inches. This force was applied to the created
partition exactly half way across the canister from where the
boundary condition was applied. The force was applied as a
pressure, where the total pressure applied to the area summed
to 5000lbf.
Loading for the entire canister was also a pressurized load,
but this time represented as a hydrostatic pressure of 26 psi.
This represents heating of the canister expanding the air
inside causing the internal pressure to increase. The load was
applied to the outer surface of the canister, but with the
direction normal and outwards to the surface.
4. Mesh Development
The meshing for the canister rings was created with quadratic tetrahedral mesh, this corresponded
to a C3D10 element type mesh. I believe this is a suitable element type for the 3D object because
the tetrahedral element is flexible with the geometry, and quadratic shape functions improve the
accuracy between nodes relative to linear shape functions. After choosing the element type, I

started out the elements at 0.250 inches to allow the elements to fit inside some of the tighter
geometry such as the ring tabs. This small mesh size allowed the two ring models to have 0
distorted elements. For the canister body, I started out the mesh size at 0.5 inches. The element
size was lowered with each model run to show convergence of the model when the number of
nodes (1/3 of the model degrees of freedom) was high.

Figure 5. Wire mesh if male and female ring assembly

During the female and male ring models there were no distorted elements for all mesh sizes.
However, for the entire canister there were 365 distorted elements on the largest mesh size. This
is due to geometry and element type. As the mesh size was refined, the number of distorted
elements went down to 33. This is because the smaller element size allows it to fit inside tighter
geometry and corners while not being distorted. From the Abaqus message file definition of
distorted tetrahedral element is as follows.
“FOR DISTORDED ELEMENTS FULL CANISTER:
DISTORTED ISOPARAMETRIC ELEMENTS: ANGLE BETWEEN
ISOPARAMETRIC LINES IS LESS THAN 45 DEGREES OR GREATER THAN 135
DEGREES. TETRAHEDRAL QUALITY MEASURE: VOLUME OF
TETRAHEDRON DIVIDED BY THE VOLUME OF EQUILATERAL
TETRAHEDRON WITH SAME CIRCUMSPHERE RADIUS; 0 FOR DEGENERATE
TETRAHEDRON AND 1 FOR EQUILATERIAL TETRAHEDRON. IT IS
RECOMMENDED THAT THE TETRAHEDRAL QUALITY MEASURE BE
GREATER THAN 0.02, THE MIN INTERIOR (DIHEDRAL) ANGLE BE GREATER
THAN 10 DEGREES, AND THE MAX INTERIOR (DIHEDRAL) ANGLE BE LESS
THAN 160 DEGREES.”

From this definition, the distorted elements were contorted past the allowed angles and were
considered inaccurate although the model does still run. Thus, these elements did not meet the
max/min angle and aspect ratio criterias. The validity of the results is in question with distorted
elements, but 365 elements is very tiny relative to the number of overall elements used (>50,000).

5. Analysis
The main analysis performed was a static analysis. Due to the complex geometry of the two rings
mating together and needing to be adhered to the canister walls, this meant that the dynamic model
would have been too time intensive. The loads on the static model were calculated to reflect the
maximum force and deflection from a dynamic impact, although we needed an estimate for the
impact pulse time to calculate the load.
There were a few main errors and warnings observed in this analysis. The first of which was that
due to the geometry being imported in through the. IGS file, some edges were not 100% accurately
mapped in solidworks. This lead to possibly a few of the distorted elements as discussed above.
The second main error was due inactive meshes. During initial trials of both the male and female
rings since there are no mapped mesh on one or the other part. Abaqus gave a warning stating seen
in figure 6 that the other part had no mesh and would not be used on the analysis along with
reference points I created.

Figure 6. No mesh error
The third main error arose when modeling the overall canister with internal pressure. Since the
model was imported in as a 3D element, laminate-type material layers could not be used with the
3D-stress type elements. It is only compatible with shell elements, however, the 3D shell element
family does not support tetrahedral elements. The following error below in figure 7 was observed.

Figure 7. Laminate not modeling properly error
Eventually I had to change the material and section type from laminate to isotropic material. This
is valid for the model because I was only concerned with the deflections in the U1 and U3
directions which is what the two inputted modulus’s represented.

6. Mesh Convergence
It is important to in finite element analysis to show convergence of results as it proves that refining
the mesh or element type will not significantly improve the accuracy of the results. Figures 8 9
and 10 below show the convergence plots for the left and right rings. This was checked by plotting
the degrees of freedom, a good indicator of the number of nodes of the refined mesh, versus the
von mises stress. In both the figures you can see the von mises stress graph asymptotes as the
degrees of freedom increases. This signifies convergence for the two ring models.

Convergence of Male Ring Model

Von Mises Stress (Psi)

3.50E+05
3.00E+05
2.50E+05
2.00E+05
1.50E+05
1.00E+05
5.00E+04
0.00E+00
0.0E+00

1.0E+05

2.0E+05

3.0E+05

4.0E+05

5.0E+05

6.0E+05

7.0E+05

Degrees of Freedom (DOF)

Figure 8. Male ring convergence

Convergence of Female Ring Model

Von Mises Stress (Psi)

3.50E+06

3.00E+06
2.50E+06
2.00E+06
1.50E+06
1.00E+06
5.00E+05
0.00E+00
0.0E+00

5.0E+05

1.0E+06

Degrees of Freedom

Figure 9. Female ring convergence

1.5E+06

2.0E+06

Values for the convergence graphs was taken at the points of maximum or most negative
deflection (depending on axis orientation). For the two rings, the element of choice, seen in the
figure X below, indicated a U3 deflection of -0.1248 inches representing the ring being pushed
outwards for that location. This would reflect the canister latching ring bending and expanding
outword during the loading case.

Unlike the two ring models, the overall canister model did not converge to a solution. Figure 11
seen below shows the Z direction deflection (U3) for the canister as the degrees of freedom
increases. The graph is hard to inteperate and there is no clear value that the model asymptotes
too. The lower value in the middle shows that the elements are inaccurate and the model is may
have lots of error. The fact that the model had around 370 deformed elements indicates that the
element quality may be poor, possibly the cause for no convergence.

Convergence Plot for Pressurized Canister
U3 Deflection in Inches

4.70E-06
4.60E-06
4.50E-06
4.40E-06
4.30E-06
4.20E-06
4.10E-06
4.00E-06
3.90E-06
0

500,000

1,000,000

1,500,000

2,000,000

Degrees of Freedom (DOF)

Figure 10. Canister convergence
7. Results
The analysis results can be seen in the following figures below. For the female and male rings, it
was apparent that deflection was highest on the edge where the load was applied. This caused the
edges to buckle outward while the base (pinned to ground) remains stationary for our boundary
condition.

For the male ring, the loading test passed as the edges only deflected a maximum of 0.13 inches,
half of the allowed deflection of 0.25 inches. Unfortunately, the female ring deflected almost 1.9
inches causing it to fail the deflection test on all run iterations.

The load causes stress to prorogate around the ring and be approximately constant throughout the
ring, but the maximum pressure is observed around the latching slot. The latching slot has tight
geometry and thinner material causing it to accumulate higher stress.

The pressurized canister exposed to 26 psi of internal pressure showed deflection on one side of
the canister more than the other side due to the pinned boundary condition letting the edges rotate.
The deflection was found to be around 6.11E-6 inches in the highest deflection case. This is due
to the ridged carbon, and 26 psi of pressure is not much for such a large volume. The stress in the
canister was very uniform due to the uniform 26 psi and saint Venant’s principle. The one
exception was the nodes where the pinned boundary condition was applied.

Figure x. Deflection of pressurized canister (Left) and Stress (right)

The raw data for both the locking rings and the pressurized canister can be seen in tables 1 and 2
below.

Table 1. Ring deflection and stresses raw data.
MALE RING

FEMALE RING

Element
size

# of
elements

DOF

Number of
distorted
elements

Deflection
Max U1
(either side)

Deflection
Max U3
(negative side)

in

#

#

#

in

in

0.250
inch

10634

56610

0

0.08370

-0.1248

0.200
inch

19237

97083

0

0.03910

-0.1249

0.150
inch

43566

212493

0

0.08410

-0.1253

0.125
inch

66198

316947

0

0.08394

-0.1253

0.100
inch

130590

602934

0

0.08419

-0.1254

0.050

Ma
x
Vo
n
Mis
es
Stre
ss
Psi
2.1
18
E5
2.7
26
E5
3.0
17
E5
3.0
54
E5
3.0
94E
5

# of elements

DOF

#

#
21837

3388

Number of
elements

in
0.500
0.330
0.250

#
68766
190745
362892

Deflection
Max U1
(either side)

Deflection
Max U3

Max Von
Mises Stress

#

in

in

Psi

0

-0.9330

-1.926

2.170E6

0

-0.9473

-1.939

2.195E6

0

-0.9580

-1.956

2.401E-6

0

-0.9640

-1.963

2.506E6

0

-9.670

-1.968

2.746E6

0

-9.843

-1.986

2.889E6

37341
6671
79419
14632
111558
21049
220323
44602
392466

Element
size

Number of
distorted
elements

19038686

Table 2. Pressurized canister raw data.
Number of
Deflection Max
distorted
DOF
U1 Positive-X
elements
#
#
in
365
297,681
4.360E-6
272
812958
6.114E-6
33
1539225
4.619E-6

Deflection Max
U3 Positive-Z
in
4.587E-6
3.942E-6
4.569E-6

8. Discussion
We discovered that the canister rings do not pass the deflection requirements. The female ring
deflected almost 8 times the limit. The canister passes the pressure requirements and will be safe
for use by the consumer
The deflection equation for the center of the lid is related to the stress. Based on the hand
calculation of a 3/8 inch plate lid the maximum stress is 12.41 KSI which falls under the 360 KSI
tensile strength while maintaining the 0.25 inch deflection limit. The FEA model shows closer to
3KSI which is much different than the hand calculations. The top of the canister is representative
of what the lid stress should equal from our hand calculations.
We have not had time to test actual models of the parts, but in the near future we will actively load
the parts for senior project and also submit the canisters for 60 minutes of live bear testing at the
San Diego zoo or Yellowstone where the real life loading cases can be tested.

9. Conclusion

While I am happy with the results, the accuracy of the models can be challenged in the future
due to the unsure nature of the boundary conditions, the laminate properties, and some of the
elements being distorted. In the future I would model the canister as laminate with composite
layers and better apply the 5000lbf pressure to the rings on the entire side, not just a small
portioned area. In the extreme case I would model it as a point load on the side. The overall
results conclude that the female ring is not nearly strong enough, while the canister body easily
passes the pressure requirement.
To conclude this analysis, we will answer questions initially asked in the background section:
For the first question, if the rings would withstand the load applied without deflecting more than
0.25 inches, the rings only partially pass. The male ring passes the test at 0.13 inches due to its
thicker geometry and increased moment of inertia. The thinner female ring failed the deflection
test at 1.9 inches of deflection and experiences high stresses in some areas due to stress
concentrations.
For the second question, the canister withstanding 26psi of pressure. The carbon laminate canister
absolute passes this test as the average stress throughout the part is significantly lower than the
yield of the composite at 200GPa. The canister also will stay adhered to the rings as it only expands
outward less than 0.001 inch and will remain in contact with the rings.

Reference Page 1/3: Maximum Internal Pressure of Canister

Reference Page 2/3: Pressure on Lid of weight dropped

Reference Page 3/3: Simply supported all around max center deflection of lid

Bear Canister Facility Design
IME 443 Final Presentation

Agenda
●
●
●
●
●

Project overview
Space Requirements
Layout Designs
Location Option
Economic Analysis

Project Overview
●

●

Carbon Fiber Bear Canister
●

Two halves and middle ring

●

Lightweight but can still protect food from animals

The Bear Necessities design team will define the manufacturing process for
creating a bear canister, and design a facility that will be able to produce 5,000
units per year.

●

Deliverables:
●

Facility Requirements

●

Cost Breakdown

●

Facility model (Sketchup)

●

Model Walk Through Video

Space Requirements
Department

Equipment

Workstations

Area/Workstati
on (sq ft)

Total Required
(sq. ft.)

Carbon Fiber Prep

Die Cutter, Table, Chest
Freezer

1

82

82

Mold Prep

Storage Cabinet, Spray
Station Table

1

52

52

Carbon Laying

Female Stainless Steel
Mold, Male Silicone
Mold, Table

3

33

99

Heat Press

Hydraulic Heat Press

4

19

76

Space Requirements
Total
Required
(sq. ft.)

Department

Equipment

Workstations

Area/Workstation
(sq ft)

Mold Separation

Table

1

33

33

QC & Hole Drilling

Drill Press, Table,
Measuring Equipment

1

52

52

Locking Mech.

Dust Extraction System,
Table

2

33

66

Ring Assembly

Ring Assembly Table

1

33

33

Final Assembly

Table

1

33

33

Total Required Area

522.6

Design Layout Selection
●

●

The weighted criteria used to
choose the optimal design layout
are as follows:
○ Distance Traveled
○ Maneuverability
○ Square Footage
○ Material Flow
Range of ratings used to measure
design layout spans from 1 being
the worst, to 10 being the best.

Distance
Travelled

Maneuverability

Square
footage

Material
Flow

Weight

10

8

5

9

Layout 1

10

6

9

10

283

Layout 2

8

10

9

9

286

Layout 3

9

8

7

10

279

Layout 4

8

9

7

8

259

Total

Design Layout Details
●

Design Layout 4
○
○
○
○

More appropriate for 2:1 aspect ratio
facility
Good maneuverability but distance
travelled is 109 feet.
Larger square footage at 1850 square
feet
Material flow not as efficient as other
designs

Design Layout Details
●

Design Layout 1
○
○
○
○

Optimizes Distance Traveled at only 81
feet.
Allows for optimal Material Flow through
manufacturing process
Smaller Square Footage requirement at
1,600 square feet.
Largest drawback is poor maneuverability

Design Layout Details
●

Design Layout 2
○
○
○
○

Designed for optimal
Maneuverability
A balance between Square
Footage and Material Flow
Requires 1,650 square feet
Total travel distance of 106 feet

Recommended
Facility Design

Location Option
●

Grover Gardens Industrial Park
○
○
○

●

Minimum Divisible Space- 1,742 sq. ft
Space delivered with “Vanilla Shell” office space
Lease Rate: $1.00/sq. Ft

http://www.loopnet.com/Listing/14101359/Huston-Grover-Beach-CA/

Annual Labor Costs
Employer Taxes

%

Labor

Qty Hourly Wage

Social Security

6.2

Skilled

4

$23

$215,952

Medicare

1.54

Unskilled

8

$10.5

$198,604

Mfg Workers Comp

9

Total labor cost per year

$414,556

CA Unemployment*

3.4

Federal Unemployment*

1.2

Employment Training*

.1

* % taken off of first $7000 only
** Includes employer taxes and assumes a 250 work days per year

Annual Cost**

Capital Equipment Costs
Equipment

Qty

Vendor

6’ Chest Freezer

1

Sears

$550

$550

http://www.sears.com/kenmore-22-cu-ft-chest-freezer-white/p-04612822000P

Die Cutting Press

1

Tip Man Clicker

$3,000

$3,000

http://tippmannclicker.com/clicker-1500-die-cutting-press/

Die Cut Mold

4

$200

$800

Hydraulic Heat Press

4

Ebay

Max Tool

Cost Per Annual Cost

Link

$20,000

http://www.ebay.com/itm/Tetrahedron-MTP-14-Compression-Lamination-Heated-Pneumat
ic-Platen-Press/371921606912?_trksid=p2047675.c100005.m1851&_trkparms=aid%3D2220
07%26algo%3DSIC.MBE%26ao%3D2%26asc%3D40130%26meid%3D7baf828b044e4bf3a2d5
0f2f214aef55%26pid%3D100005%26rk%3D1%26rkt%3D2%26sd%3D222491652015

$3,400

$3,400

https://www.maxtool.com/jet-j-2221vs-20-variable-speed-drill-press-115-230v-1ph-354221
?google=1&CAWELAID=230005740000021097&CAGPSPN=pla&CAAGID=19685619371&CAT
CI=pla-144707421131&gclid=Cj0KEQjwgODIBRCEqfv60eq65ogBEiQA0ZC5-S83ERqydzp_Jdnr
qKp1NS3vlaezCKJjDTZ2ODYr8mEaAnCf8P8HAQ

$5,000

Drill Press

1

Half Mold

8

$8,000

$64,000

Ring Mold

4

$2,500

$10,000

Capital Equipment Costs
Equipment

Qty

Silicone

60 kg

Dust Extraction System

1

Storage Cabinet

Vendor

Cost Per Annual Cost

Link

$14.82

$889

https://wholesaler.alibaba.com/product-detail/good-price-raw-material-liquid-silicone_60494050611.html

Baileigh

$567

$567

http://www.baileigh.com/dust-extraction-system-dc-1650b , http://www.baileigh.com/dc-accessory-kit-deluxe

1

Ebay

$675

$675

http://www.ebay.com/itm/Parent-Metal-Heavy-Industrial-Premium-Storage-Cabinet-36x24x78-Putty-/1123772901
27?hash=item1a2a355d8f:g:l3EAAOSwgmJXyT7v

Workbench: 60”x30”

10

Global Industrial

$190

$1,900

http://www.globalindustrial.com/c/work-benches/open-leg?infoParam.campaignId=T9A&gclid=CKW3iqKS9dMCFd
CXfgodC-8AhA

Workbench: 96”x36”

1

Global Industrial

$320

$320

2

your-industrial-s
upplies

$674.65

$1,349.30

http://www.ebay.com/itm/Parent-Metal-Heavy-Industrial-Premium-Storage-Cabinet-36x24x78-Putty-/1123772901
27?hash=item1a2a355d8f:g:l3EAAOSwgmJXyT7v

5

Ebay

$187.24

$936.20

http://www.ebay.com/itm/Edsal-72-H-x-72-W-x-24-D-Steel-Welded-Storage-Rack-Industrial-Heavy-Duty-Black-/27
2572947588?hash=item3f769d1c84:g:7vkAAOSwCU1YthER

Storage Cabinet

Storage Rack

Total Initial Investment

$107,711

Material Costs
Material

Qty

Vendor

Cost Per Annual Cost Link

Thumb Screw

3

McMaster

$2.84

$8.52

Elastic net

1

Online Fabric
Store

$5.70

$5.70

https://www.mcmaster.com/#thumb-screws/=17mphg7

Amazon

$21.49

$0.58

https://www.amazon.com/dp/B00006RSP1/ref=asc_df_B00006RSP14985821/?tag=
hyprod-20&creative=394997&creativeASIN=B00006RSP1&linkCode=df0&hvadid=1
67126942869&hvpos=1o3&hvnetw=g&hvrand=532993939789216912&hvpone=&hv
ptwo=&hvqmt=&hvdev=c&hvdvcmdl=&hvlocint=&hvlocphy=9031723&hvtargid=pla-2
74443084439

cardboard boxes 1

ULINE

$0.64

$0.64

https://www.uline.com/Product/Detail/S-18344/Corrugated-Boxes-32-ECT/12-x-12-x12-Lightweight-32-ECT-Corrugated-Boxes

6-32 screw nut

3

Fastenal

$0.03

$0.10

Carbon Fiber 50
yard x 50 inches

0.0232

Prepreg

$1,900

$44.08

velcro

0.027

Total Material Cost Per Canister

$59.62

Other Annual Costs
Maintenance Qty Cost Per

Annual Cost

Expendables Qty Cost Per

Annual Cost

Die Sharpening

50

$50

$2,500

Mold Release*

5,000

$1

$5,000

Mold Rework

12.5

$1,000

$12,500

Respirators**

1,000

$14

$14,000

Total maintenance per year

$15,000

Total expendable per year

$19,000

* Assumes production of 5000 units, and a $1 cost per
canister for mold release
** Assumes production of 5000 units, and a 5 year life

Cash Flow Calculation
Assumptions
10-year project life
5% interest rate
40% tax rate
Straight-line depreciation

Sales

$2,500,000

Initial Investment

($106,775)

Labor

($414,556)

Material

($298,083)

Other

($65,000)

Depreciation

($10,678)

Taxable Income

$1,733,039

Taxes

($693,216)

Net Income

$1,027,010

Depreciation

$10,678

CashFlow

$1,037,688

Economic Justification
●
●

Need to sell 1587 canisters each year in order to breakeven
Net Present Value assuming 5000 sales annually is $8 mil

Questions?

Appendix O.
User Operator's Manual
Your canister features the following parts
1.
2.
3.
4.

Canister Top with Attached Stiffening Ring
Canister Bottom Half
Net
Thumb screws (x3)

To close your canister:
1. Load your canister with food.
2. Stretch the net along the top of the inner surface of the canister top where velcro is and
velcro net securing your food.
3. Turn your canister top upside down and attach to the canister bottom.
a. Make sure the arrows are aligned so the holes on the canister top and canister
bottom align.
4. Screw the thumb screws to lock the canister.
To open your canister:
1.
2.
3.
4.

Unscrew the thumb screws.
Pull apart canister ensuring the top half with the net is pulled from the top.
Take net off from its velcro supports.
Access food.

Maintaining your Canister:
1. Use attention and care when loading food into and out of container.
2. Do not overtighten screws when locking the canister.
3. Clearcoat or lacquer the outside of the canister to maintain its finish look, but do not
sand.
4. Avoid impact forces on the canister or storing next to sharp objects.

Safety Guidelines.
1. Be aware of your lower back when lifting and setting down the canister.
2. Avoid contact with children, as the screws can be a choking hazard.
3. Do not continue to use the canister if the carbon fiber weave is compromised.
4. Use care and finesse when screwing in the bolts
5. Do not use either canister half to eat food off of.
6. Sit only on the canister if it is oriented in the vertical direction.

