Grey Water Capture
Final Design Review

ME 430-06
Senior Project III
Spring 2017
6/2/2017

Kevin Alexander
Paul Brenneman
Vicente Ramirez

Instructor:
Professor Rossman

Mechanical Engineering Department
California Polytechnic State University
San Luis Obispo, CA

Table of Contents

Page	No.			
1	
1	
3	
4	
5	
5	
6	
6	
7	
8	
8	
8	
8	
8	
9	
9	
10	
10	
11	
15	
16	
19	
20	
20	
20	
22	
22	
23	
23	
25	
25	
25	
26	

Section	
1	
2	
2.1	
3	
3.1	
3.2	
3.3	
3.4	
3.5	
3.6	
3.7	
3.8	
3.9	
3.10	
3.11	
4	
4.1	
4.2	
4.3	
4.4	
4.5	
4.6	
5	
6	
6.1	
6.2	
6.3	
6.4	
6.5	
6.6	
6.7	
6.8	
6.9	

Section	Title	
Introduction	
Background	
Benchmarking	
Objectives	
Customer	Requirements	
Scope	
Boundary	Sketch	
Quality	Function	Deployment	
Specification	Development	
Water	Reused	
Installation	Time	
Maintenance	Frequency	
Leakage	
Manual	Labor	
Capacity	
Design	Development	
Concept	Generation	
Idea	Generation	Strategies	
Top	Concepts	
Decision	Matrix	
The	Optimal	Solution	
Prelim.	Safety	and	Test	Plan	
Management	Plan	
Final	Design	Details	
Design	Description	
Material	Selection	
Safety	Consideration	
Maintenance	Issues	
Justification/Evidence	
Installation	Time	
Maintenance	Frequency	
Leakage	
Manual	Labor	

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

Page	No.	
26	
26	
27	
27	
29	
29	
30	
32	
32	
32	
32	
33	
33	
34	
34	
34	
34	
34	
34	
35	
35	
35	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

Section	
6.10	
6.11	
7	
7.1	
8	
8.1	
8.2	
8.3	
8.4	
9	
9.1	
9.2	
9.2.1	
9.2.2			
9.2.3	
9.2.4	
9.2.5	
9.2.6	
9.2.7	
9.2.8	
10	
11	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

Section	Title	
Stand	For	Our	Storage	Tank	
Supporting	Data	
Project	Plan	
Manufacturing	Plan	
Manufacturing	
Grey	Water	Stand	Constr.	
Grey	Water	Tank	
Installing	Pump	Fittings	
PVC	Tubing	
Testing	
Design	Verification	Plan	
Test	Carried	Out	
Flowrate	from	Shower	to	Tank	
Installation	Time	
Maintenance	Frequency	
Leakage	
Manual	Labor	
Tank	Tipping	
Minimum	Water	Height	
Float	Switch	
Conclusions	
Resources	
Appendix	A:	QFD	
Appendix	B:	Idea	Sketches	
Appendix	C:	Pugh	Matrices	
Appendix	D:	Decision	Matrix	
Appendix	E:	Design	Hazard	Checklist	
Appendix	F:	Gantt	Chart	
Appendix	G:	Analysis	of	Top	Desig	
Appendix	H:	CAD	Drawings	
Appendix	I:	DFMEA	
Appendix	J:	Bill	of	Materials	
Appendix	K:	DVPR	
Appendix	L:	Spec	Sheets	
Appendix	M:	User’s	Manual	
	
	

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	

	
	

	
	

Statement of Disclaimer
Since this project is a result of a class assignment, it has been graded and accepted as
fulfillment of the course requirements. Acceptance does not imply technical accuracy or
reliability. Any use of information in this report is done at the risk of the user. These risks
may include catastrophic failure of the device or infringement of patent or copyright
laws. California Polytechnic State University at San Luis Obispo and its staff cannot be
held liable for any use or misuse of the project.
	

1

1 – Introduction
Grey water is relatively clean water that is produced when potable (drinkable) water is used
for tasks such as washing hands in households. Grey water can be reused for things like
irrigation, washing cars, and toilet flushing.
Many households today do not implement any kind of grey water recycling system. People
do not get a grey water system for a variety of reasons; the benefits could be unknown, the
uses for grey water could be limited in their specific home, or the economic gain is too
minimal to constitute a modification to the house.
For our project, we are going to design an easy to install product that enables the reuse of
grey water from household sources. Examples of our final product could be something that
lets the customer use grey water from the bathroom sink to the toilet or from the shower to
the toilet in an easy manner.
With guidance from our sponsor Michael Allwein, we will make the benefits of grey water
recycling accessible to the average homeowner, reducing their household water usage and
saving them money.

2 – Background
Grey water is defined as gently used water that comes from devices like sinks and showers
that has not come into contact with sewage. Because grey water is almost as clean as
potable water in many cases, possibilities of reusing grey water have been explored by
environmentalists and homeowners to help the environment and cut down their water bill.
Grey water can be used for things such as irrigation, toilet flushing, heat reclamation,
washing the car, and watering plants. Capturing the water that flows out of the shower head
while it warms up and then using the water to fill the reservoir in a toilet is just one of many
examples of how grey water can be used. Saving freshwater is beneficial to the user by
decreasing their water bill and also helps the community conserve, which is especially
important in times of drought. An additional environmental benefit is that recycling water
limits the amount of sewage your house produces, as grey water ends up mixing with
sewage water.
Grey water is usually harmless, but there are cases where the application can warrant the
need to treat and filter the water. An example can include reusing kitchen sink water, which
can hold toxic materials like those found in detergents, which need to be avoided if the
water will be used on plants. The storage of grey water also needs consideration, as the

2

bacteria in grey water can colonize as quickly as 24 hours causing strong odors and
rendering it unusable in some cases.
Grey water codes in the United States differ from state to state. West Virginia and
Massachusetts allow grey water systems only in houses with a composting toilet. Florida
bans outdoor grey water use but allows it for flushing toilets. Georgia allows residents to
carry grey water in buckets to the plants, but they cannot get a permit to build a simple grey
water irrigation system. Washington state’s code allows very small systems built without
a permit (following performance guidelines), but all other systems have quite stringent
requirements [1].
Since then, many areas are reconsidering the regulations and making them less strict. The
laws are dependent on the area and many are about irrigation use, as this has potential to
affect other people by spreading disease in the soil or air. As grey water becomes more
valuable as the benefit of saving water increases and as the risks (or lack thereof) are
understood better, laws and regulations are becoming less strict. This opens opportunity to
expand the use of grey water in the home.
According to the Universal Environmental Protection Agency, the average American
family of four uses around 400 gallons of water per day. Figure 1 shows toilets alone can
make up around 25%, or 100 gallons, of home water usage. This proves that there is
potential to make a substantial impact on home water usage by using gray water.

Figure 1: Percent of home water usage by appliance
Why are grey water systems not popular in homes if they could potential reduce water
usage by a fourth? The main reasons are that water is cheap, aesthetics of the home are
important, it takes time and money to implement a system, and there are risks such as
damaging plumping. There is evidence that grey water systems often come short of their
goals. Art Ludwig, a renowned environmentalist and grey water activist, shares from his
experience that “most complex grey water reuse systems are abandoned within five years”
and “most simple grey water systems achieve less than 10% irrigation efficiency within

3

five years”. While a significant percentage of grey water projects fail, there are also ones
that do have a positive impact. A handful of these successful systems are listed below.
2.1 Benchmarking
Grey water systems come in all shapes and sizes. While there are some off-the-shelf
systems available, there are also other systems being pioneered by DIY'ers. During the
benchmarking process, we researched both off-the-shelf and home built systems.
If implemented correctly, reusing washing machine grey water for yards can save a
substantial amount of water. As shown in Figure 1, the washing machine uses 80 gallons
of water a day which could easily be used for irrigation in a home with a large yard. The
water could either be gravity fed or pumped to the irrigation. However, depending on the
layout of the home and the skill of the installer, this system might not be appealing to the
majority of homes. [1]
A commercially sold existing product is the Sink Positive toilet cover, shown in Figure 2.
This product is a sink that is put over the toilet allowing the sink water to flow directly into
the toilet tank. Some benefits of Sink Positive are easy installation, no extra energy is
needed, and no extra space is taken up. There is little maintenance and all of the sink's grey
water has potential to be reused.

Figure 2: Sink Positive
Wetlands consists of plants that can feed and purify grey water. The main benefit of
purifying grey water is if the grey water is going to be discharged into a water source.
While purified grey water is better to discharge than non-purified grey water, both are not
recommended and potentially not legal. The main value for having wetlands would then
be the same as having other plants.
A product that was once commercially sold but currently out of commission is called The
AQUS Sloan system. Shown in Figure 3, this system has a tank and pump under the
bathroom sink which moves the sink's grey water to the toilet when water is needed. The
AQUS Sloan system is similar to Sink Positive but allows the homeowner to keep the
bathroom layout more conventional while paying the price of extra energy inputted. It also
includes a filter which clears objects like hair from entering the toilet tank. The pump
knows when to pump the water by observing a sensor on the tank.

4

Figure 3: Sloan AQUS Grey Water System
Patents that could be infringed upon by our solution were researched and documented.
Patents generally last for around 20 years, which is important because we found some 20+
old patents are very relatable to our project. A patent filed in 1992 has the description "Gray
water is collected from a tub, shower, or sink, by a drain fixture module, and is stored in a
storage tank module for reuse in flushing a toilet" [14]. This patent sound similar to the
Sloan AQUS system. Another patent filed in 1992 claims "the present invention provides
a gray water recycling system that can conveniently direct gray water from a fixture such
as a wash basin, sink, tub, or shower to a holding tank or the like by replacing the fixture's
existing drain pipe with a drain pipe valve assembly that is operable between a drain
condition, in which water from the fixture is allowed to flow down the drain pipe into the
sewer line, and a recycle condition, in which the water is blocked from flowing into the
sewer line and instead is allowed to flow into a holding tank line and ultimately to the
holding tank" [15]. This patent is very broad and seems to claim any kind of system that
stores shower/bath water in a tank. If our ideas infringe on either of these patents, then
more research will be done to see if they are still active.

3 - Objectives
Our overall goal is to design and build a grey water capture system to answer the demands
of those homeowners who wish to save water. During our group meetings we developed
certain requirements that we felt would be important in a successful grey water system. In
addition, we surveyed homeowners (family, friends and teachers) to get other insights and
feedback about our goals. Homeowners surveyed ranged from those living in
municipalities with very expensive water, to those who simply wanted to decrease their
environmental footprint. The opinions we gathered allowed us to develop a reasonable list
of customer requirements in no particular order.

5

3.1 Customer Requirements
The customer requirements for our system are shown below. These are all qualities of our
system that need to be met for our product to be appealing to someone looking to reuse
grey water.
1. Grey water must be filtered and treated properly
2. The system must be safe for the user and environment
3. The system must be an economically positive product
4. Grey water must be recycled at least every 24 hours [8]
5. Deodorize any foul odors present in system
6. Easy to install and maintain
7. Aesthetically pleasing
8. The system must not leak
9. Divert excess water in storage unit to sewage
10. Minimal manual labor
In addition to these requirements, we also need to be aware of proper grey water usage.
Following state regulations is one of our biggest priorities when it comes to our product.
Summarizing where most states stand on grey water, our system shall be prohibited from
the following uses: [9]
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Consumed by humans or animals
Used for bathing or showering
Used to top-up swimming pools or spas
Used for food preparation or washing dishes or kitchen appliances
Used for irrigating in a way that will contact edible parts of herbs, fruit, or
vegetables
6. Piped to hot water services
3.2 Scope
These are several different ways that grey water can be reused once the water has been
treated properly. Table 1 shows some potential grey water sources and destinations. Any
of the sources can be combined with any of the destinations to arrive at a potential grey
water capture system. As you can see, irrigation, toilet flushing and car washing are
reasonable uses for recycled grey water.
Table 1: Grey Water Sources and Uses
Grey Water Source

Grey Water Destination

Sink

Irrigation

Shower

Toilet Flushing

Washing Machines

Car Washing

6

3.3 Boundary Sketch
We would like to further discuss the scope of our project and what we will deliver as a
finished product to our sponsor. There are certain elements of our project that we will not
be able to provide for the system to fully function. Our non-portable system will have
mechanical components that require utilities such as electricity and water which we will
not provide. The system will be designed to store and reuse water. Our boundary sketch in
Figure 4 shows our vision of the entire system. Indicated by the dashed lines are the
components of the system that we are responsible for. Some of these components include
a container to capture grey water (on top of toilet), an electrical pump, non-rigid piping
system, valves and fittings which are designed to safely fit into your home plumbing. The
source of grey water will be the shower as shown in Figure 4, while the destination is the
toilet that allows for a maximum savings of water.

Figure 4: Boundary sketch of our system and different ways grey water can be reused.

3.4 Quality Function Deployment
We used a Quality Function Deployment (QFD) exercise which can be found in Appendix
A to identify and quantify customer requirements, wishes, expectations and demands. The
QFD allowed us to measure our product versus existing products which gave us certain
benchmarks to build upon and help drive our engineering specifications. Once we
completed our QFD we were able to see the shortcomings of the products currently on the
market. We found that while some of the systems are easy to install, they are inconvenient
to use and don't save much water. Additionally, we found that some which do save a good
amount of water are too difficult to install for the average homeowner. Both the QFD and

7

customer requirements allowed us to develop a set of design specifications which are listed
in the table below.
3.5 Specification Development
Engineering specifications provide measurable and quantitative criteria for satisfying the
customer’s needs and requirements. The engineering specifications we chose were based
on the results of the interviews we conducted with our sponsor Michael Allwein along with
potential customers. While conducting these interviews, we were able to determine exactly
what they’re looking for in a grey water capture system. The engineering design
specifications we developed are listed in Table 2 followed by an overview for each
specification. Under the compliance column, "A" refers to analysis, "T" refers to testing,
"I" refers to inspection, and "S" refers to similarity existing designs.
Table 2: Engineering Specifications
Spec
#

Specification
Description

Target
(units)

Tolerance

Risk

Compliance

1

Water Captured

20
gal/day

Average

M

A, T

2

Installation Time

1 hour

Max

M

S, T

3

Maintenance
Frequency

1 time per
3 months

Min

M

S

4

Leakage

None

Max

M

I

5

Manual Labor

None

Max

M

I

3.6 Water Reused
Water is a scarce resource that is often used in a wasteful manner. The amount of water to
be reused is a specification that was chosen based on our goal to save the most water. The
plan is to save five gallons of water per day on average. Since our bathrooms are one of
the largest consumers of water in our household; this would be an ideal place to reuse
water. Specifically, the water to be reused is that from the shower head, due to its higher
flowrate when compared to that of the sink. The water will then be diverted to the toilet
which can be used for flushing. This will allow us to save the maximum amount of water
while using only one source of grey water. We can achieve this by testing and being
actively aware of potential drawbacks that need to be prevented in order to reach this
standard.

8

3.7 Installation Time
Whenever a product is too difficult to install it can cause a “loss of interest” for the user.
A simple to install system is ideal for most people. The installation time of our product will
take the average person one-hour maximum. We plan to achieve this by designing a system
that is easy to install, while at the same time meeting all of the requirements needed to
capture grey water. In order to achieve a simple to install system, we will minimize the
number of components that are needed to be assembled and have a standard size that can
fit the average home toilet tank.
3.8 Maintenance Frequency
Maintenance frequency is a specification that was developed through research on existing
systems and seeing what ideas that we can incorporate into our own system. There will be
components to our system that require maintenance to keep the system working at its
optimal level. Maintenance will be required approximately four times per year or once
every three months. Maintenance includes inspection and cleaning of critical components
like the filter and the tank itself. This specification is a key quality in the performance of
our system in order to maintain its efficiency.
3.9 Leakage
A closed system that will not leak in any way is a very important specification that was
considered in order to keep our system performing properly and reducing potential hazards
that come with leaking water. If any leakage occurs, it can affect the amount of water we
save in our homes and cause potential dangers like the user slipping and possible electrical
hazards that can come from the electric pump. A durable watertight system will be
implemented to reduce any leakage and potential hazards.
3.10 Manual Labor
Initially a transportable system was going to be designed. However, after research and
ideation, we developed the specification that no manual labor would be required once the
system is installed. The idea will be to create a cycle that does the work for you. Rather
than transporting a container, the water will be siphoned from the shower and into the toilet
through a piping system. A pump will perform the work required to siphon the water from
the shower.
3.11 Capacity
Ideally, we want to have a large enough container so that we can save a minimum of one
flush per day. Rather than using fresh water with our system, we would like to have a large
enough tank to be placed on top of the toilet tank itself to where every flush is grey water
that has been reused. This specification will meet all requirements necessary to capture,
deliver and transport grey water in a non-portable way.

9

4– Design Development
There are several major phases which we will move through during this design process.
First, we spent the first few weeks researching and defining the problem. This included
interviewing our customers or end users and what their needs might be. Once our problem
and customer needs have been clearly defined, we will then move forward into the ideation
phase. The ideation phase is when we developed some conceptual solutions to solve the
problem as we’ve defined it. Once we came up with a range of possible solutions, the next
step was to use Pugh Matrices in combination with a decision matrix to converge on the
best possible solution. This process is detailed below and that "best solution" will be
revealed. Pending approval from our sponsor, we will move forward with that concept
design solution.
Following the New Year, we will enter into the next few phases of the design process.
During the next five weeks, we will develop the detailed design of our chosen concept.
Once we have a detailed design, we’ll present that to you in the form of a Critical Design
Review in the first few weeks of February. Following your approval of the design, we will
then begin obtaining materials and building a prototype.
Once we have built a working prototype, the next phase will be testing. This is when we’ll
find out how effective our design is and how well we’ve achieved the objectives we set for
ourselves at the beginning of the design process. Finally, the last item on the agenda is to
present our project at the “Project Expo” on June 2nd. Completing this, we will also present
our final report and the hardware we have developed to you.
In Figure 5, you will see the general design process our Senior Project class will follow,
along with certain dates for deliverables.

Figure 5: Design process flowchart

10

4.1 Concept Generation
Concepts for our grey water system were created after our specifications were made. The
goal for this section is to come up with many ideas that will later be evaluated in the idea
selection part of the process. Focusing on the functions that our system needs will lead us
to many possible system configurations. These functions include capturing, transporting,
and delivering grey water.
4.2 Idea Generation Strategies
In order to come up with solutions we used many well-known idea generation strategies
including brain-writing, brainstorming, and the SCAMPER method. Brain-writing is when
each team member writes down individual ideas on a sheet of paper. The paper is then
passed around to other team members where each idea is built upon. Brainstorming is
when idea generation is done as a team all at once with a whiteboard and posted notes. The
SCAMPER method is used at the end when new ideas are created my combining and
modifying ideas that have already been created. Attached in the Appendix B are pages that
show sketches that were created through these strategies.
When involved in the idea generation strategies we stayed focused on the functions needed
for the system. Focusing on functions allows us to come up with partial solutions that can
then be combined into a complete solution. The individual functions and potential ideas
are shown below. For each function, a Pugh matrix was generated in order to weigh the
various options against each other and rate how well they accomplished the function. A
Pugh matrix is a commonly used tool which helps facilitate disciplined, team-based
concept generation and selection. In a Pugh matrix, multiple concepts are evaluated against
a reference concept which helps illustrate the strengths and weaknesses of each. The Pugh
matrix associated with each function is given in the appendices.
Function 1: Capturing Grey Water
Our system will need to capture grey water from a source. The main sources of grey water
in a home are sinks, showers, and washing machines. For sinks, installing a T-flange in
the existing piping under the sink is the easiest way to gain access to the grey water. For
showers, capturing grey water is more difficult because the drain piping is buried under the
shower basin, making it much harder to access. To come up with solutions, we looked at
different points in the shower grey water can be captured. Points of capture include before
the water has flown out of the showerhead, before the water goes down the drain, or after
the water has flown down the drain. If the water is allowed to flow out of the showerhead
(allowing someone to bathe with it) the water can then be captured in a container like a
bucket. An alternative to this is to let the water pool on the shower floor and then be
siphoned by a vacuum like pipe. Capturing the water after the water goes down the drain
could be accomplished by tapping into the plumbing and installing a T-flange, but as
discussed earlier this would be much more difficult. For washing machines, installing a Tflange where the water exits the machine would be an easy solution. For all of these ideas,
the grey water can be sent directly into a tank or left in the piping.

11

Function 2: Transporting Grey Water
After the grey water is captured, the next need of the system is to transport the grey water
to the destination. This can be accomplished by human power, either by carrying or rolling
the tank. The alternative way to transport the water is by using an electric or hydraulic
pump in combination with a pipe system.
Function 3: Delivering Grey Water
The destinations to reuse grey water include toilets and irrigation. For toilets, modifying
the top of the toilet tank would allow incoming grey water to be used. When a toilet tank
needs to be refilled the grey water would be used in place of the freshwater normally used.
To do this we would need to modify the float valve in the toilet to ask for grey water first.
For irrigation, the delivery of the water depends on the format of the yard. Having drip
piping can be used through the areas that need watering if a large area needs to be covered.
Another way to deliver the water is a sprinkler system.
4.3 Top Concepts
The following will be a discussion of the top concepts that were generated in the design
development process. Each concept was chosen because it meets the customer
requirements, but which one is the optimal solution?
Concept #1:
One potential solution that we considered was a grey water system underneath the sink.
For this concept, the water will be stored into a container underneath the sink. This
particular concept met all the requirements that we have developed. In order to capture
grey water, the tank is connected to the existing piping through a T– flange where a grey
water tank resides as shown below in Figure 6.

Figure 6: A sketch of our Sink to Toilet concept.

12

In order to route the water from underneath the sink to the toilet, it is required to drill a
hole in the vanity which will be used to route the piping through and directly to the toilet
as shown in the figure above. Gravity and a pump will allow the water to be transported
from under the sink and directly to the toilet. Where the piping meets the tank of the toilet,
there will be a leveling clip that will stabilize the toilet lid. This concept allows for the re
use of water in a non-intrusive way since the grey water tank is stored inside the vanity at
all times.
Concept #2:
Another concept was to capture water from a different source such as the shower and
deliver the water to the toilet. For this particular concept, water is siphoned from the
bathtub as you are warming up the shower. As you warm up the shower, all the water is
captured from the shower and diverted to the toilet as shown in the figure below. The means
of transporting this water will be through an electric pump that is connected to a non-rigid
piping system in your shower. This non rigid piping system will be installed from the
shower to a small electric pump that will pump the water up to our tank which can be used
for flushing.

Figure 7: Grey water system from shower to toilet with tank on top of the toilet
The means of transporting this water will be through an electric pump that is connected to
a non-rigid piping system in your shower. This non rigid piping system will be installed
from the shower to a small electric pump that will pump the water up to our tank which
can be used for flushing.
Concept #3:
Furthermore, another concept that was considered was to use the grey water from the
washing machine which can then be diverted to the irrigation. We thought of this concept
as a system that will go from laundry to your landscape as shown in Figure 8.

13

Figure 8: A sketch of a washing machine to irrigation system.
For this particular concept, we were not actually storing grey water, but we are diverting
the grey water directly to the landscape. To accomplish this, the system captures grey water
from the drain hose and sends it out to the plants, grass or any other landscape where grey
water can be used. To transport the grey water, the system relies on a sloped surface along
with gravity. Benefits to this concept include a system that does not rely on an external
pump to transport the water.
Concept #4:
A similar concept that was generated is a grey water system that captures water from the
shower and delivers the water to the toilet. However, instead of using an electric pump,
this system uses a hydraulic pump to send the water to the toilet.

Figure 9: Sketch of shower to toilet grey water system by way of hydraulic pump

14

The way it works is there will be an impeller / propeller connected to the existing piping
before the shower head. So as long as the shower is running, the pump is receiving
hydraulic power. This system will have an automatic on/off feature which automatically
turns on when the shower is running and turns off when the shower is not running. One
distinct advantage is that this system avoids electricity thus avoiding potential dangers
and motor costs that arise while using electricity.
Concept #5:
The last concept that was generated involved two electrical pumps and a grey water storage
tank that is placed on the ground beside the toilet as shown in Figure 10.

Figure 10: This system is a tank that is beside the toilet which involves an electric
pump to transport the water.
This concept meets the requirements to capture, transport and deliver grey water. The water
is siphoned from the bottom of the shower by one pump which then transports the water to
the grey water tank. After, the water is pumped by the second pump and into the toilet tank
which can be used for flushing. A benefit to this concept includes the safety of not having
a large tank on top of the toilet that can potentially fall off the toilet. However, a
disadvantage for this system is its reliance of two pumps; one to pump the water from the
shower and into the grey water tank while the other pump is sends the grey water from the
tank directly to the toilet.

15

4.4 Decision Matrix
The top concepts are a few of the many concepts that were placed in a decision matrix in
order to systematically converge on the best solution. In the decision matrix, requirements
were weighted against each other according to their respective priorities we gathered from
interviewing potential users and our project sponsor. Concepts were than graded on how
well they met those specific requirements and each concept was given a point total. By
comparing those point totals, we were able to select the concept which best satisfied all of
our design requirements. The decision matrix can be found in Appendix C.
Concept #1, capturing water from a bathroom sink, storing it in a tank inside the vanity,
and pumping it to the toilet as needed; lost points for a tricky installation, the necessity of
having a vanity big enough for the tank, and not saving as much water as other solutions.
Concept #2, capturing water from the shower and using an electric pump to pipe the water
to a holding tank placed on top of the toilet reservoir tank; held up well in the decision
matrix. It will be one of the easiest systems to install, works in most homes, saves a large
amount of water, shouldn't leak and is very safe. Also, the water is constantly being used
so it won't be stagnant enough to culture into black water and is aesthetically pleasing while
still being very easy to use. Despite the installation process being one of the easier ones
among our concepts, it lost points for the potential that the shower and toilet could be fairly
far apart. It also lost a few points in the "works in most homes" category as well for this
same reason. The projected cost of this system will be on par with the other concepts
generated, but more expensive than a simple container.
Concept #3, washing machine to irrigation. While this concept will be very safe and easy
to use, it did not fare well with the other requirements. Its installation, costs, and aesthetics
were not worse than other designs, but not all homes have washing machines near their
landscaping. Additionally, the water from the washing machine will not be very clean at
all - most likely containing strong degreasers.
Concept #4, capturing water from the shower and using a hydraulic pump to deliver it to a
holding tank placed above toilet reservoir. This concept is nearly identical to Concept #2,
except a hydraulic pump will be used instead of an electric pump. A hydraulic pump would
eliminate the need for electricity, but we found the hydraulic pump had some strong
disadvantages as well. First, it would need to be placed between the wall and the shower
head. Unless it is to be anchored to the wall, this configuration will put shear and bending
stress on the fresh water pipe going into the wall. These pipes can be made of a brittle
plastic, and are not designed to sustain heavy loads. Should the pipe fail, water will flood
into the wall and quickly do massive damage? Water damage is some of the worst that a
house can sustain, and requires lengthy and costly repairs. For this reason alone, the
hydraulic pump was considered too much of a liability. Additionally, placing a hydraulic
pump in line with the shower head will reduce the shower water pressure – making showers
less enjoyable. Finally, there are many users who enjoy taking baths in their combination
shower / bath units. With a hydraulic pump, the system would not be able to capture any
of the bathwater because there would not be any flow coming through the shower head to

16

provide pump power. The only way to capture bath water would be to add an electric pump
to the system. But if you're going to do that, then what is the point of the hydraulic pump?
As will be discussed later, small waterproof electric pumps only cost around $10-15 and
use less than 10 watts of power – a nearly miniscule amount. While it's a clever solution,
we concluded the benefits of using a hydraulic pump simply did not outweigh its many
disadvantages.
Concept #5, capturing water from the shower and storing it in a tank on the bathroom floor
before it is pumped to the toilet. While this concept saved a good amount of water,
shouldn't leak, was very safe, clean, and easy to use; there were a few distinct
disadvantages. First, not all bathrooms have floor space for a large water tank. Second,
this concept would be unsightly – it is not attractive to most potential users to have a large
tank on their bathroom floor. Finally, we realized this concept would require two pumps
for it to work properly. This is because water first needs to be pumped from the shower to
the holding tank. Than once it is needed in the toilet reservoir, the water needs to be
pumped yet again. Two pumps would add considerable cost to this system and is an
inefficient way to re-use the water when comparing to Concept #2 (only one pump
required). For these various reasons, it was determined this concept did not perform as
well as other's we considered.
4.5 The Optimal Solution
The results from our decision matrix were that Concept #2 was determined to be the
optimal solution. It is the best answer to the customer requirements we have gathered from
potential users and our sponsor.
In order to get a more detailed idea of how our grey water capture system would be
arranged, a solid model layout was done. As you can see from the front and top views
given in Figures 11 and 12, the plan is to pipe water from a shower to a tank located on top
of the toilet reservoir using a small pump.

Figure 11: Front view

17

Figure 12: Top view
What was emphasized going through the process of building a solid model layout is this
system is best suited for bathrooms where the shower is located near to the toilet.
At this stage in the design process, exact dimensions have not yet been determined. The
tank will need to fit on top of a toilet revoir so that requirement inherently drives the length
and width of the tank we will be designing. Likewise, the exact height of the tank is not
yet determined. All we have at this stage is that the tank should contain enough volume to
match the volume of water associated with at least one flush of the toilet. So in that sense,
we know the tank size will be a function of that volume requirement. Together with the
length and width requirement discussed earlier, these two requirements will drive the tank
geometry. We also have some idea for the internals of the tank but no specifics yet. We
know there will need to be a system of valves which will ensure the filling of the toilet
reservoir will bias to our grey water tank, but will also pull water from the fresh water line
should the tank run empty. We know that the tank will likely be made out of plastic, but
we have not decided upon this material at this time. We are still considering other materials
such as fiber glass and metal as potential alternatives. If possible, it would be best if the
tank could be purchased instead of needing to be manufactured – at least for the first
prototype.
Since this system is designed to be configurable by the DIY installer, the tubing connecting
the inlet to the pump and the pump to the tank will likely be cut to fit. We are envisioning
that when this system is sold as a product, included in the kit will be a length of tubing
which the DIY installer will simply cut to the length needed for their specific bathroom
layout. The exact length of the tubing included in the final kit which would cater to most
bathroom layouts has yet to be determined. The Bernoulli analysis was conducted with ½
inch tubing which yielded a relatively low required pump head of just 4.75 ft. Pump head
required is highly dependent on the diameter and length of the tubing, so further analysis
will be required before we are able to determine the optimal tube diameter. Likewise, the
specific material selected for the tubing has not yet been decided. We know it is important
for the tubing to be flexible so that it can easily conform to varying bathroom layouts and
be easy to install. We also know that the required pump head is a function of the friction
factor, which depends on the tubing material; so that will serve to help determine tubing

18

material as well. That being said, no specific material has been selected. This will most
likely be something which we purchase instead of manufacture ourselves.
The selection of the pump to pipe the water from the shower to the tank has likewise not
yet been selected. We have however done some preliminary calculations using the
modified Bernoulli’s equation and have an idea for what sort of pump head will be required,
we know it should be around 4.75 ft. So while we don’t have a specific pump selected, we
do know that the sort of pump head required will likely be achievable by a small fish tank
or pond pump. Either way, this is a component we will be purchasing and not
manufacturing ourselves.
The exact geometry of the inlet which is to collect the water from the shower basin has also
not yet been determined. An idea we’re considering at this time is that there will be a
suction cup on the bottom of the inlet housing which will affix it to the floor of the shower
to keep it from moving. But as was stated, the geometry of this component has not yet
been determined. It is very possible this is a component we will be needing to manufacture
ourselves due to the uniqueness of this system. Therefore, the material choice will most
likely depend on our ability to manufacture it. 3D printing out of ABS could prove to be
a very good option here for the first prototype, or maybe we’ll choose to machine it out of
Delrin. Either way, we are fairly certain it will be made of some sort of plastic as it is
difficult to see any benefit to choosing metal or a composite.
As you can see there are still more than a few unknown in our design, but we feel that we
are very much on the right track. We are eager to overcome each of these challenges.
4.6 Preliminary Safety and Testing Plan
Both the water reused and installation time specifications will require testing. Once we
have a working prototype, it will be installed in one of the team-member’s bathrooms. This
install process will allow us to put to the test our specification of an installation time less
than 1 hour. Once the system is in place, we will be able to test our first engineering
specification; if it will recycle more than 5 gallons of grey water per day.
In order to ensure safety, a preliminary design hazard checklist has been completed. The
checklist is given in Appendix D. In summary, there will be a spinning pump which could
be harmful. There is the hazard that the tank could fall from its location on top of the toilet
reservoir tank. The system will most likely have sharp edges which could be dangerous.
The system will be exposed to high temperatures and high humidity in the bathroom, as
bathrooms tend to fog up during hot showers. Finally, there is the possibility that the
system could be used in an unsafe manor. Table 2 below shows the relationship between
our tests and specifications.

19

Table 2: Engineering Specifications
Spec
#

Specification
Description

Target (units)

1

Water reused

20 gal/day

Average

M

A, T

2

Installation Time

1 hour

Max

M

S, T

4

Maintenance
Frequency

3 months

Min

M

S

5

Leakage

None

Max

M

I

6

Manual Labor

None

Max

M

I

Tolerance Risk

Compliance

In light of these potential hazards, we plan to answer them with a combination of good
engineering design as well as warning labels and disclaimers. We will place warning labels
and clear instructions in the instruction manual in order to warn users against inserting their
fingers into the pump while spinning. In order to address the heavy water tank, there will
be a warning given in the instruction manual and the tank may potentially be attached
rigidly to the toilet reservoir tank. To address sharp edges, there will be a warning in the
instruction manual and edges will be rounded where possible so that we can reduce
potential stress concentrations that may be present in the system. To address the hot/ humid
environment the electric pump will be a waterproof variety, potentially battery powered if
that proves to be better and safer. Finally, in order to address the possibility for unsafe use;
we plan on including a warning and disclaimer in the instruction manual.

5- Management Plan
In general, our team seeks to work on stages of the design process together as a group. We
believe that the ideal way to incorporate both individual ideas and team consensus is to
work on tasks individually and then come together and share what we have done and what
we have found. From there we will share and understand our different points of view to
ultimately arrive at an agreement on how best to proceed. This process means that we will
rarely ever have just one person working on any one task, all members of the team will be
working together to ensure each task is completed to the best of our ability. We will
approach each step of the process as a team. Should we arrive at a stage which does not
require all team members to be dedicating time to it; we will decide at that time who is best
to take charge of that task.
That being said, each team member will have certain specialties - things they are constantly
doing which the team relies on to stay on track. Paul has elected to keep the team on track

20

and maintain communication with our project sponsor. Kevin will maintain our travel and
material budget. Vicente will maintain our information repository. Together, the team has
the analytical skills, engineering intuition, and prototyping skills needed to take this project
from conception to prototype.
Our project Gantt chart for the first phase of the design process is included in the
appendices which details each step in the process. The major milestones will be design
reviews, reports, prototype testing, and the design expo. These are stages of the process
where we would very much appreciate involvement from our sponsor.

6- Final Design Details
6.1 Design Description
Our final grey water capture system design allows homeowners to conveniently reuse their
shower water to fill their toilet. This is accomplished by pumping water from the shower
to a tank which sits on a stand directly above the toilet. This final design is very similar to
the optimal solution in the design development section above with a few changes, most
notable a shelving unit that will now support the tank instead of the tank resting on the
toilet. The CAD drawings showing our final design can be referenced in Appendix H. CAD
drawing 0001 shows the full assembly of the design.
The pump, shown as item 5 in the main assembly, will be turned on when the shower is
being used and will be responsible for the power required to send grey water from the
shower to the tank. The pump chosen is the SHURflo 2088-59-154, which is self-priming
and provides a maximum 100 feet of head at a flowrate of 3 gallons per minute. Selfpriming was a critical attribute for us because the flow of water will not be constant and
the pump will need to function when there is only air in the pipes. Two male brass barbed
fittings will be threaded into the inlet and outlet of the pump so that it can be connected
with the PVC tubing. The PVC tubing on the inlet side will go to the shower floor and the
outlet side will go to the tank. It is important to note that the water level on the shower
floor must be over ½” high to allow the inlet pipe to be able to collect water.
The end of the tube which collects the grey water will be attached to the shower floor by a
suction cup in order to stay below the water line, as shown in the sub-assembly CAD
drawing 0004. Item 2 in the sub-assembly is a suction cup that will be attached to the PVC
pipe via a zip-tie. Item 4 in the sub-assembly is a carbon impregnated felt filter sheet which
will cover the opening of the inlet pipe to deny hair and other follicles from entering our
piping system and getting tangled in the pump or causing other adverse effects. The felt
sheet will also be attached with a zip tie. During assembly, the inlet pipe should be placed
where the water level will be highest; near the drain in most cases. The drain of the shower
will need to be disabled by either closing the drain or installing a plug in order to collect
the water so it may be captured.

21

The piping layout, shown as item 7 in the main assembly, will depend on the bathroom and
will need to be assembled by the individual. We envision the end product to come with
approximately 25 feet of PVC flexible tubing; up to approximately 20 feet will be used to
traverse from the shower to the tank and the remainder will be used to connect the tank to
the toilet. In order to minimize head loss, the minimum amount of tubing required should
be used; however, the pump specified can supply enough head should the user need the full
25 feet.
The PVC tubes will be connected to the tank with the barbed-fittings as shown in CAD
drawing 0003. The sub-assembly shows two parts: the piping (item 1) and the plastic
barbed fitting (item 2). The inlet and outlet holes from the tank will feature this attachment
method.
The tank to toilet sub-assembly, detailed in CAD drawing 0005, shows how to connect the
tank to the toilet while also keeping the main water line connected. A brass tee joint will
be utilized for this purpose along with the proper barbed-fittings. Our product is designed
to collect enough shower water to meet the toilet water demand; so the main water line
should remain shut off. However, in the event the tank runs empty, the main water line may
be turned on to supply water until the user can collect more grey water.
The shelving unit, part 8 in the main assembly, is used to support the tank above the toilet.
The shelving unit will be purchased from Home Depot and comes at a height of 60” with
6 shelves, each with a capacity to hold 250 pounds. This weight capacity is able to hold 20
gallons of water with a 1.5 factor of safety. Only the top shelf will be used in our design,
and the height will be cut to the length specified (33”) using a chop saw in the
manufacturing phase by the team.
The tank, part 2 in the main assembly, will be used to hold the grey water and is attached
to the shelving unit with four sealed bolts. The tank has a capacity 25 gallons of volume
but will only be filled to 20 gallons. The reason for choosing the 25-gallon tank was
because the proportions and cost of the tank specified best suited the design. The
proportions for the 20-gallon tank were not conducive for our design. A float switch will
be installed within the tank and will be used to shut off the pump when the tank gets to our
desired max water volume of 20 gallons. A 5" access hole on the top of the tank will be
needed in order to allow installation of the float switch. Additionally, there will be five
other holes drilled in the tank at the locations specified in CAD drawing 0002. Two of these
holes (.19” diameter) are used to mount the float valve, one (.50” diameter) is for the wiring
of the float valve, one (.54” diameter) is the inlet from the shower, and one (.38” diameter)
is the outlet to the toilet.
The float switch assembly, which will be attached on the inside of the tank, can be seen in
CAD sub-assembly 0006. The float switch bracket will be mounted with the holes that
were drilled in the tank, shown as item 1 in the sub-assembly. The float switch (item 2)
will rise when the water volume is near 20 gallons and physically interrupt the circuit

22

powering the pump. Proper operation of the float valve is critical because if more than 20
gallons is allowed into the tank, the factor of safety for the shelving unit will drop below
1.5.
6.2 Material Selection
For many of the components in our design, material was a primary factor in choosing which
to purchase. The reasons for these choices are enumerated below in Table 4.
Part
Pipe
Suction Cup
Pump
Filter
Tank
Float Switch
T-Joint
Stand

Table 4: Materials selected for system
Material
Reason material Selected
PVC
Flexible, cheap, light
Corrosion inhibition
Zinc-Plated Steel
Durable
(Various)
Water Proof
Removes odor/follicles
Carbon impregnated
Minimal head loss
Light
Plastic
Corrosion inhibition
Floats in water
(Various)
Corrosion inhibition
Brass
Strength
Steel
Strength, Durability

6.3 Safety Considerations
In order to brainstorm some of the potential safety considerations associated with our
design, a Design Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (DFMEA) was created as seen in
Appendix I. The resulting safety considerations and corresponding precautions are
summarized in Table 5 below.
Failure Mode
Stand Collapse
Tank Overflow
Electrocution
Tripping over Pipe

Table 5: Safety Considerations
Effect
Precaution
Possible human injury
Do not load the stand with
Tank breaks/spills on floor
more than 250 pounds
Damage the toilet
(20 gallons of water).
Float valve to close tank
from
Water spillage
shower water works
correctly.
Human injury
Pump is waterproof
Damage to pump
Assemble piping system so
Human injury
the risk of tripping is
Possibly pull tank over
minimal

23

Slipping from water
in shower
Water level is not
high enough

Human injury

Place mat in shower

No grey water captured

Plug shower drain

Filter Clogged

No grey water captured

Pump cannot provide
enough head

No grey water captured

Odor from Tank

Bathroom smells

Tube Disconnects

Leakage

Check for items blocking
filter before each shower
Assemble piping system
for least head loss
Clean tank at the
maintenance
frequency suggested
Attach pipes using the
barbed fitting assembly

6.4 Maintenance Issues
The maintenance plan provided will allow the system to run successfully for a long period
of time. The filter should be inspected and cleaned as this will allow more water to pass
through while minimizing head loss. The tank should be cleaned to kill bacteria and prevent
odors from lingering in the bathroom. The suction cup should be cleaned when the suction
is loss. The pump, stand, float switch, and pipes have no maintenance plan as they should
work for a long period of time on their own. A more detailed look at the maintenance plan
is shown in Table 7 below.
Part
Filter
Suction Cup
Tank

Table 7: Maintenance Plan
Maintenance Plan
Replace once per three months
Clean when suction is loss
Clean once per three month

6.5 Justification/Evidence
In order to reach our target of reusing 20 gallons of water per day, it was necessary to
determine the potential volume of water that could be captured. By doing research on the
average household size, average elapsed shower duration, and average shower flowrate,
we were able to conduct this analysis. Table 8 shows the information used.
Table 8: Research data used to determine potential water reuse.
Average
Average Elapsed
Average Shower
Average Number
Household Size
Time Per Shower
Flowrate
of Showers per
Day
2.54 People
8 minutes
2.1 gallons per
1
minute

24

By conservatively assuming only 50% of the available water is captured, we would still
capture over 20 gallons of water; satisfying our specification. In reality, we expect to be
able to capture much more than 50% of the available water; although some will be lost as
steam.
Another important design decision was the size of the pump that would be required to pump
water from the shower to the storage. To aid our decision in what pump would be required,
we first designed our CAD model to the appropriate scale. While designing the model, we
determined the water would need to travel a maximum height of 5.5 feet. From this point
we conducted a modified Bernoulli analysis to find pump head required. The following
shows the assumptions in order to calculate for the pump head required:
Assumptions:
Incompressible fluid (fluid being analyzed is water)
Constant properties at the inlet and outlet control surface
Velocity at the inlet will be considered equal to the velocity at the outlet
Shower head flow rate of 2.1 gallons per minute.
Smooth pipe tubing system
Modified Bernoulli
Equation:

Where the pump head is

(1)

, the total head is

, and

is the maximum height of our apparatus. After simplification, the following equations
resulted:
Head Loss:

(2)

Velocity :

(3)

Reynolds Number:

(4)

While making relevant assumptions and using the equations, we obtained data from the
moody diagram (for round pipes) and fluid property tables. Looking up the kinematic
viscosity at ambient temperature (70 ° F) we were able to calculate Reynold’s number.
Also, using the assumption that our system will be similar to that of a smooth pipe system.
After obtaining Reynolds number and the relative roughness of our system, we were able
to use the Moody diagram (Figure 13) to find the friction factor.

25

Figure 13: Moody diagram used to calculate the friction factor.
Based on Reynolds number and relative pipe roughness, we used the Moody diagram
shown in Figure 13 to obtain a friction factor of 0.04 which allowed us to calculate the
pump head required using equation (2). Figure 14 contains a suitable pump that meets
our requirements.

Figure 14: SHURflo 115 VAC diaphragm industrial pump.
The SHURflo pump specified in our design can provide 100 ft of head, far exceeding the
calculated required head. This pump was chosen primarily because it is self-priming up to

26

9 vertical feet. This was a critical requirement because the system will need to be primed
every time water is collected from the shower and the pump will need to pull water up and
over the side of a tub in some instances. It was for these reasons this particular pump was
chosen, despite the fact that it can supply a pump head far exceeding the requirement.
6.6 Installation Time
Installation time will be justified based on similitude. We do this by considering other
systems of similar size and scale. Components that will need to be assembled include:
tubing, pump, storage tank, float switch and shelving unit. Please note that the pump and
the float switch will need to be connected to allow for proper control of the pump. The
system is designed to be assembled and installed with minimal tools. Tools necessary
would include screwdrivers, scissors, and hex keys. To reliably and conveniently connect
the tubing and the storage tank, barbed fittings will be used. Barbed fittings will allow the
user to easily slip the tube onto one side of the barbed fitting while the other threaded side
will be screwed into the tank.
6.7 Maintenance Frequency
Maintenance details are given in the maintenance plan section. only maintenance that
would be required will be to replace the filter every three months. This is based on
similitude of other filters that are of a similar nature to the filter we are incorporating into
our system. Based on research, we found that that the lifetime of a standard filter is at least
3 months. Also due to wear and tear on the system, other components might need to be
replaced every so often. To account for this, our system is composed of standard parts that
can be obtained at most hardware stores. Also, the user will have additional tubing that can
be used to replace any worn tubing.
6.8 Leakage
Understanding that testing for leakage is important because leakage can waste water, cause
damage, and be a safety hazard; it is a priority to ensure our system is properly sealed and
take every precaution necessary to ensure a watertight system. To accomplish this task,
every inlet and outlet of our system will be sealed. Furthermore, if any leakage occurs from
faulty tubes, additional PVC tubing will be readily available as it is a standard component.
Any leakages that might occur within our system can be easily detected through a quick
and simple inspection.
6.9 Manual Labor
Manual labor will not be required for this system since our system is an assemble, install
and run type of system. The only “manual” requirement for the user would be to activate
the system through a 3 wire grounded switch tap as shown in Figure 15 which is then
plugged into the outlet.

27

Figure 15: Leviton 3-Wire Grounded Switch Tap.
The switch is a safe alternative which only requires the user to simply press the switch to
activate the system. Thus, through our design no manual labor is required.
6.10 Stand for Storage Tank
Since there are building codes that state a centerline of the toilet has to be at least 15 inches
from the outer edge of the shower (nearest to the toilet) we were finding difficulties on
where to place the storage tank. If we had chosen to place the storage tank on the ground
next to the toilet, we would have to get a very slim and tall tank which would likely not
allow room for the pump and tubing. After strategizing, we decided to have a shelving unit
that the tank would reside on while being kept in place and preventing any tipping from
occurring. The stand we chose is one that we can purchase and holds a maximum load of
250 lbs. This is more than enough, even if our storage tank is full to the 20 gallon limit it
will only weigh approximately 167 lbs. Due to this, we calculated a factor of safety.
(5)

The factor of safety that was calculated was 1.5. Not to mention, the stand itself has a factor
of safety associated with it, so our calculated factor of safety is likely very conservative.
6.11 Supporting Data
The total cost of our system including shipping and tax is $452.25. Our sponsor has been
involved throughout the design process; so, while he did not give us a hard budget, he is
informed about how much the system will cost. A summary of the bill of materials is shown
in Table 9 below (the complete BOM can be seen in Appendix J).
Table 9: Parts and Costs
Part
30 Gallon Tank
SHURflow Pump
Shelf
Float Switch
Backflow Prevention Valve

Total Cost
$94.45
$85.31
$43.17
$39.94
$36.54

28

Nylon Barbed Fitting
Brass Barbed Fitting (Male)
PVC Tubing
Suction Cup
Socket Head Screw
Tee Joint (Pipe Fitting)
Steel Flange Nut
Filter Sheet
Steel Washer
Switch Tap
Steel Hex Nut
Brass Barbed Fitting (Female)
Zip Tie
Hex Panel Nut
Steel Rectangular Bar
Brass Pipe Nipples
Total Cost

$16.05
$14.90
$14.58
$13.69
$11.42
$10.77
$10.37
$10.10
$9.85
$8.10
$7.87
$6.44
$6.26
$5.18
$3.72
$3.55
$452.25

The bill of materials ordered in descending price shows the tank and the pump are the
two most expensive items at $94 and $85 respectively. The shelving unit, float switch,
and backflow prevention valve are next at around $40 each. All other parts are under $20.
The Gantt chart in Appendix F shows the appropriate timing to receive all components.

7- Project Plan
7.1 Manufacturing Plan
One of the strongest aspects of our chosen design is its simplicity. Because of this
simplicity, we were able to specify standard components, which serves to ease time spent
manufacturing and ultimately reduce cost. The two manufacturing tasks to be completed
are cutting the shelving unit to the desired height, specified on drawing number 0001 in
Appendix H, and drilling the holes in the water storage tank needed to mount tank fittings
and the float switch. We plan to complete both tasks in the machine shops on campus in
order to maximize safety.
The steel shelving unit will function to support the weight of the tank and position it above
the toilet. The dimensions of the shelving unit are 60 in. x 23.23 in. x 13.39 in. as shown
in Figure 16.

29

Figure 16: Shelf Storage Unit
60 inches is too tall for our purposes, so the four legs will need to be shortened. The
shelving unit is of steel construction, so the legs will be cut on a chop saw with a blade
designed to cut steel. The tolerance on the length is ± .25 inch, as can be seen on drawing
0001. The precision we can expect from a chop saw will be more than good enough to
achieve such a wide tolerance.
The second manufacturing operation we will need to conduct will be to drill the holes in
the 30-gallon water storage tank. These holes will be necessary for the mounting of the
barbed fittings, which will be used to connect the ½ in. PVC tubes to the tank, as well as
mounting the float switch bracket. As can be seen on drawing 0002, the dimensional
tolerance on the hole locations are ± .25 in. for everything except the mounting bracket
holes. The mounting bracket holes must be located with greater precision relative to each
other, but the location of the mounting bracket relative to the edges of the tank is noncritical. This information is conveyed with the ±.25in position tolerance to one of the
mounting bracket holes, and the ±.025 in. tolerance on the spacing between the holes. The
size tolerance on all holes was specified to be ±.015 in. The precision required for both the
position and size of the holes is not beyond what is reasonably achievable with just a hand
drill and a set of drill bits.
The components specified for this design are readily available and we expect no trouble in
procuring them in a timely manner. There are a wide range of suppliers from which we
could acquire them from should we run into problems. The shop tools required to complete
these manufacturing processes are likewise widely available and the processes themselves
are not time consuming. For both these reasons, we do not expect problems with
determining a time to complete the necessary manufacturing processes in the on-campus
machine shops. Both processes are also within the capabilities of the team members to

30

complete without the assistance of shop techs, so we will not need to plan for their time
availability.
We expect the completion of the two manufacturing processes to take only about an hour
or two of shop time, but have planned a week in order to accommodate potential setbacks.

8– Manufacturing
Following a meeting with our sponsor, it was decided that while the proposed design was
very good; some cost saving decisions could be made in order to build the most economical
proof-of-concept prototype. Some of the elements in the proposed design were deemed to
be not totally necessary to being able to conduct testing and design verification. This was
decided because many of the components in the proposed design would be used as they
were intended, it was decided that there is little purpose in conducting what would
essentially be product testing of those components. This decision resulted in the
elimination of the suction cup, filter, and components which would connect the 25-gallon
tank to the toilet. Additionally, the steel stand which we planned to purchase from Home
Depot was substituted for one of wood construction, again this was done in order to save
cost and avoid just doing product testing of existing things on the market. This decision to
omit certain components during testing and substitute the steel stand for a wooden one does
not constitute a design change and are instead simply cost saving measures to lower the
cost of the proof-of-concept prototype intended to just prove the validity of the proposed
design.

8.1 Grey Water Stand Construction
The wooden stand substitute was constructed using 3-inch deck screws, 2 x 4 in. Pine
lumber, and ¾ in. Plywood. A quick finite element analysis was conducted in Solid Works
in order to verify the design would be capable of bearing the weight of the 25-gallon water
tank.

31

Figure 17: Finite Element Analysis of Stand
It is important to note the limitations of this finite element analysis due to the fact that it
was assumed to just look at the strength of the wood and disregard the fasteners. Friction
between the stand legs and the ground was also neglected in order to make the analysis as
conservative as possible. The analysis resulted in a factor of safety of approximately 6
which is high enough to conclude that even with the prior assumptions, the stand would
be more than strong enough for our purposes.
In order to construct the stand, the 2 x 4 in. Lumber was first cut to length on a Miter Saw
and the plywood top was cut using a Skill Saw. Clamps were used to hold the pieces in
place so they could be screwed together.

Figure 18: Clamping for Stand Construction

32

8.2 Grey Water Tank
There were several modifications that needed to be made to the 25-gallon water tank so it
can be used in the system. First, an access hole was cut in the top of the tank so the team
could reach inside. This was completed using a router bit in a Dremel.

Figure 19: Cutting the Access Hole
Next, the holes for the inlet and outlet barbed fittings were drilled with a hand drill along
with the four bolt holes in the bottom of the tank which would be used to rigidly connect
the tank to the stand using sealed bolts.

Figure 20: Bolting the Tank to the Stand (only 2 of 4 bolts shown)
Finally, the float switch bracket was attached to the tank using socket head cap screws.
The required holes were drilled using a hand drill.

33

8.3 Installing Pump Fittings
Adapter fittings were installed into the SHURflo pump so that it could be connected to the
½ in. PVC tubing. The only combination of adapter fittings which would work required
some minor PVC cementing along with proper application of teflon tape on threads.
Ultimately the pump was successfully connected to the ½ in. PVC tubing.
8.4 PVC Tubing
The PVC tubing was cut according to how the team decided to the system should be laid
out. Cutting of the tubing was completed using scissors, before the tubing was attached to
the barbed fittings and secured in place with Zip-Ties.

9 – Testing
9.1 Design Verification Plan
During the assembly portion of our design process, we will be testing our product in a
bathroom to confirm that we meet all design specifications. Table 10 shows a subsection
of the design verification plan (see Appendix K) and a total of nine tests to evaluate how
our design meets our specifications.
Test No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Table 10: Design Verification Plan
Specification
Test Type
Acceptance Criteria
Pump flowrate
> shower
Testing
Must be greater than 2.1 gpm
flowrate
Installation
Install system in
Similitude
Time
1 hour or less
Maintenance
Every 3 months
Similitude
Frequency
maintenance is required
Leakage Test
Inspection
No leaks
Manual Labor
Inspection
No Manual Labor once installed
Tank Tipping
Testing
Tank does not tip when bumped
Minimum
Pumping works when water is ½
Water Height
Testing
inches high
of Source
Float switch turns of pump when
Float Switch
Testing
water in tank reaches 20 gallons

Test 1 is to ensure the pump can transfer water faster than the shower will be putting it out.
To test for this, we will simply run our system from empty until the float switch turns off
the pump to indicate 25 gallons of water has been delivered to the tank. We will than take
the 25 gallons of water now in the tank and divide it by the time it took to fill to calculate

34

the flowrate of the pump. This must be greater than 2.1 gpm, the average flowrate from a
shower head.
Test 2 is to be able to install the system in an hour or less. We will time ourselves
assembling some tasks and the rest will be estimates based on our experience.
Test 3 is that the maintenance frequency required by the system is no more than once every
three months. The main items to maintain are the tank (odors, cleanliness), the filter, and
the suction cup. We will be using data based on researching similar products to get an
accurate estimate that these three items will fit this specification as our project timeline
does not allow for a 3-month test.
Test 4 is to check the system for leakage in our tubing system. After the system is
assembled, we will run the system and investigate each assembly for leakage. Since our
system is relatively small, we can easily inspect our system to see if any leakage occurs
within the system.
Test 5 is that there is no manual labor after the product is assembled. This will be done by
inspection.
Test 6 is to make sure the tank does not tip when a force is applied. This test will be done
by simulating someone bumping into the stand and by yanking on the tubes attached to the
tank.
Test 7 is to test how high the water has to be in the shower for the water to circulate to the
tank. This will determine how long the shower needs to be on before the system can start
and if this is feasible.
Test 8 is to check that the float switch turns the pump off when the water in the tank reaches
20 gallons. This will ensure the tank does not overfill when there is an excess amount of
grey water.
9.2 – Tests Carried Out
The results for the tests carried out are shown in Table 11 below. How each test was carried
out is discussed in the following sections.

35

Table 11: Tests to ensure specifications were met
Test No.
Specification
Pass/Fail
Pump flowrate
> shower
Pass
1
flowrate
Installation
Pass
2
Time
Maintenance
Pass
3
Frequency
Leakage Test
Pass
4
Manual Labor
Pass
5
Tank Tipping
Pass
6
Minimum
Water Height
Pass
7
of Source
Float Switch
Pass
8
9.2.1 – Flowrate from Shower to Tank
The flowrate from the shower to the tank was tested by timing how long the tank takes to
fill up when the pump is drawing water from a source. Our source used was a bin full of
water which has the same effect as the shower floor would. Filling the tank to 20 gallons
was timed to be 7 minutes and 25 seconds, giving a flow rate of 2.7 gpm, which is slightly
higher than the average shower head flow rate of 2.1 gpm. The 2.7 gpm is accepted by our
criteria of having a system flow rate that is higher than the shower flow rate and will be
convenient to the user because they will not have to leave the pump running for much
longer after the shower is turned off.
9.2.2 – Installation Time
Although the system was not fully installed into a bathroom, we still have a good idea of
how long the installation process will take. The table below shows the amount of time that
each part of the installation process took. The last six rows of the table were only estimated
which is denoted by the asterisk.

36

Table 12: Times to Install Parts
Task
Assemble Stand
Bolt Tank
Bolt Switch
Cut Tubes
Connect Tubes
Plug in Pump
Attach Suction
Cup
Attach Zip ties
Attach Filter
Install T-Flange
Connect toilet
pipes
Connect
Backflow
Preventer
Total

Time
[min]
5
10
5
5
5
1
2
2*
5*
5*
5*
2*
52

9.2.3 – Maintenance Frequency
The maintenance frequency of our system is compared to other systems with similar
aspects. Cleaning the tank for should occur once a month by using bleach to clear out
residue bacteria. The filter should be switched out every three months for optimal use. The
suction cup should be able to be used for multiple months without having to replace it.
9.2.4 – Leakage
The leakage test consisted of filling the tank up with water, in order to ensure the
hydrostatic pressure seen by the outlet barbed fitting and sealed bolts will be equal to what
it would be during operation; and inspecting the system for any leaks. No leaks were
observed, resulting in a pass.
9.2.5 – Manual Labor
After the system is installed there will be no manual labor left. The only actions that will
need to be taken are turning on and off switches and moving the pipes for convenience.
The rest of the system will not be tampered with.

37

9.2.6 – Tank Tipping
The tank tipping test was intended to simply be a look at how stable the system was when
the tank was full of water. Team members applied lateral forces on the system and
observed system behavior. The system remained stable during all applied forces and
therefor passed the test.
9.2.7 – Minimum Water Height
The minimum water height for the system to run properly was found to be 3/8". In a 4'x5'
shower running at 2 gpm this will take between two and three minutes to get to this height.
9.2.8 – Float Switch
The float switch test was conducted in order to ensure it would interrupt power to the pump
when the volume of water in the tank reaches approximately 25 gallons. To conduct this
test, the pump was switched on and water was pumped into the tank. The water level rose
and activated the float switch which then interrupted power to the pump. This resulted in
a passing grade for this test.

10 – Conclusions
In the beginning of our design process we had a certain visualization of what our end
product would look like. Initially, we were set to design and build a transportable system
that would lie underneath the sink. This particular system might have been very simple and
would have satisfied our sponsor's requirements; but after undergoing a rigorous idea
generation process, we realized that we can maximize our water savings if we used our
system with the shower water as the source and our toilet as the destination. As time
passed, we realized just how much thought would be needed to go into the design process.
Sometimes, we felt that we were doing a bunch of unnecessary tasks and that some of the
senior project tasks were a bit overkill. We soon found out that all of the tasks we performed
were necessary, otherwise we might not have come up with an alternate solution to the
initial idea that was proposed by our sponsor. Through this whole process, much was
learned in terms of working on a team and undergoing a "real life" engineering process that
would be similar to industry.
The engineering process of design, build and report writing that our group has gone through
over the past school year has been both exciting and challenging. There were at time a lot
of pressure between meeting deadlines and juggling our other classes. However, in the end
we realized that despite all of the tough times we had, this experience has ultimately been
a benefit for each of us. This experience has taught us to be even more considerate of other
people's time and further understand the meaning of team work. Each person in our group
has different strengths and weaknesses but together we have learned to understand and
work with each other to produce positive results. It's hard to believe that we have been
working on this project for 9 months and now it's coming to an end.

38

11 – Resources
1. "Greywater Reuse." Greywater Reuse -. Greywater Action, n.d. Web. 24 Oct.
2016.
2. "Greywater Recycling Systems." Flotender. N.p., n.d. Web. 24 Oct. 2016.
<http://www.flotender.com/pages/greywater-recycling>.
3. McKenzie, Richard B. "My California Water Is an Undiluted Bargain." WSJ.
Wsj.com, 04 May 2015. Web. 24 Oct. 2016.
4. Perlman, USGS Howard. "How Much Water Does the Average Person Use
at Home per Day?" Per Capita Water Use. Water Questions and Answers; USGS
Water Science School. N.p., n.d. Web. 24 Oct. 2016.
5. "Sloan's Innovative AQUS Grey Water Toilet System Recycles Your Sink
Water." Inhabitat Green Design Innovation Architecture Green Building. Web. 24
Oct. 2016. <http://inhabitat.com/sloans-innovative-aqus-grey-water-toilet-systemmakes-every-drop-count/aqus-water-reclamation-system-5/>.
6. "Toilets." Water Usage Calculator, Water Conservation and Efficiency. N.p., n.d.
Web. 24 Oct. 2016. <http://www.home-water-works.org/indoor-use/toilets>.
7. United States Environmental Protection Agency, n.d. Web.
8. "Oasis Design: Grey Water Books, Ecological Design Information &
Consulting." Oasis Design: Grey Water Books, Ecological Design
Information & Consulting. N.p., n.d. Web. 18 Nov. 2016.
9. "Technical Specifications On Grey Water Reuse And Rainwater ..." Technical
Specifications on Grey Water. N.p., n.d. Web. 5 Nov. 2016.
<http://www.wsd.gov.hk/filemanager/en/content_1081/technical_spec_grey_wate
r_reuse_rainwater_harvest.pdf>
10. Lepisto, Christine. "WaterSaver Technologies Aqus Uses Sink Greywater for
Toilet."
TreeHugger.
N.p.,
n.d.
Web.
06
Nov.
2016.<http://www.treehugger.com/bathroom-design/watersaver-technologiesaqus-uses-sink-greywater-for-toilet.html>
11. "Save Water And Money With A Toilet Sink Combo - Toilet Found!" Toilet Found.
N.p., 2016. Web. 07 Nov. 2016. <http://toiletfound.com/save-water-money-toiletsink-combo/>
12. Publications, Inc. Ogden. "From Laundry to Landscape: Tap Into Greywater Green Homes - MOTHER EARTH NEWS." Mother Earth News. N.p., 2011. Web.
07 Nov. 2016.

39

13. "Greywater Diverter Grey Water Recycling - Aqua2use GWDD ." Aqua2use. N.p.,
n.d. Web. 07 Nov. 2016
14. Grey Water Recycle System. John McDonald, assignee. Patent 5,243,719. 14 Sept.
1993. Print.
15. Ford, Ronald K. Grey Water Recycle System. Michael Bell, assignee. Patent
5,274,861. 14 Dec. 1992. Print.

23

QFD: House of Quality

Appendix A: QFD House of Quality

Project:
Greywater Capture
Revision:
1
Date:
18-Nov-16

Correlations
Positive
Negative

+
−

No Correlation
Relationships
Strong
Moderate

●
○

Weak
Direction of Improvement
Maximize

▲

Target

▼

9

Chemically safe to use

4

||||

9%

8

8

9

No smell

5

||||

9%

8

8

9

Easy to install

6

|||||

11%

10

10

9

Pipes hidden, if pipe system

7

||

6%

5

5

9

Minimal maintainence

8

|||

8%

7

7

9

Aesthetically pleasing

9

|||||

11%

10

10

9

Does not leak

10

||||

9%

8

8

9

Portable by average person, if necessary

11

||||

9%

8

8

9

Low capital cost

Row #
16

0%

●

●
●
●
○

●
●
●
●
○

●
●
●
●
●
○

●
●

●
●
●
●

●
○

●
●
○
●
●
○

●
○
●
●
○

●

○

○
●
○
○
○
○

○
○
●

Cup under sink

10

●

Toilet top sink

10

●
●

Bucket under shower

11%

○
●

SLOAN AQUS

|||||

WHAT: Customer
Requirements (explicit &
implicit)

Low capital cost

3

0%

8

Our Current Product

Economically positive

15

7

Chlorine tablets and filter life

Non-intrusive in daily life

9

0%

6

Must offset at least $5 per month

9

5

0%

5

Threaded and QD Fittings

10

5

14

4

Chemically Treated

10

6%

13

3

Watertight

11%

||

0%

2

NOW: Current Product Assesment - Customer Requirements

Capacity

HOW: Engineering
Specifications

Maximum Relationship

Avg. Homeowner

Relative Weight

Sponsor

|||||

2

Weight Chart

1

12

1

5

5

1

1

5

1

5

5

5

1

1

2

5

5

2

5

5

3

5

5

2

5

5

4

4

4

5

5

5

5

5

4

5

3

2

6

5

5

1

5

1

7

5

3

1

2

1

8

5

5

1

5

1

9

5

5

2

2

2

10

5

5

5

5

5

0

1

2

3

4

5

Row #

Column #
Direction of Improvement

WHO: Customers

Size

Minimize

11
12
13
Our	Product	

14

SLOAN	AQUS				
Bucket	under	shower			

15

Toilet	top	sink	

Relative Weight

No water drips

Water stable for 24 hours

Can be installed by
homeowner in 1 hr

$5 savings per month

3 monthes

$100 Maximum

Max Relationship
Technical Importance Rating

Dimensions = x * 2x * 3x

HOW MUCH: Target

5.5 Gallons

Cup	under	sink	

9

9

9

9

9

9

9

9

410.112 549.438 567.416 576.404 452.809 369.663 425.843 237.079
11%

15%

16%

16%

13%

10%

12%

7%

|||||

|||||||

|||||||

||||||||

||||||

|||||

|||||

|||

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

5

4

2

5

2

Bucket under shower

1

5

1

1

5

1

5

5

Toilet top sink

2

2

5

5

5

1

5

5

Cup under sink

1

1

1

1

5

1

5

5

Our Product
SLOAN AQUS

5

3

4

Our	
Produ
ct	

1

2

SLOA
N	
AQUS			

0

Current Product Assesment - Engineering Specifications

Weight Chart

Column #

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

16

Appendix	B:	Idea	Sketches	
	

											
	
	

Figure	B-1:	Modifying	Sink	Piping	to	Extract	Grey	Water	

Figure	B-2:	Using	Rocks	and	Pot	Scrubbers	to	Filter	Grey	Water	for	Irrigation	

	

	

Appendix	B:	Idea	Sketches	(Continued)	

																
	

Figure	B-3:	Capturing	Grey	Water	from	Sink	using	Tank	

Figure	B-4:	Using	Grey	Water	Flow	to	Generate	Electricity	
	
	
	
	

	

	

Appendix	B:	Idea	Sketches	(Continued)	

Figure	B-5:	Multiple	Ways	to	get	Grey	Water	for	Toilet	Flushing	

	

Appendix C: Pugh Matrices

Appendix D: Decision Matrix
Concepts
Weights
Baseline
Shower	to	Toilet	(Stacked	Tank,	Electric	Pump)
Shower	to	Toilet	(Stacked	Tank,	Hydraulic	Pump)
Shower	to	Toilet	(Floor	Tank,	Electric	Pump)
Shower	to	Toilet	(Floor	Tank,	Hydraulic	Pump)
Sink	to	Toilet	(Vanity	Tank,	Electric	Pump)
Container,	from	shower	to	landscape
Multiple	carried	tanks,	from	sink	to	landscape	
Adjustable	faucet	for	toothbrush
Sink	or	shower	to	landscape	via	wheeled	tank
Bucket,	from	shower	to	toilet
Sink	to	plants	in	bathroom
Toilet	top	sink
Washing	machine	to	landscape

Rating
Percentage
Rating
Weighted	Rating
Rating
Weighted	Rating
Rating
Weighted	Rating
Rating
Weighted	Rating
Rating
Weighted	Rating
Rating
Weighted	Rating
Rating
Weighted	Rating
Rating
Weighted	Rating
Rating
Weighted	Rating
Rating
Weighted	Rating
Rating
Weighted	Rating
Rating
Weighted	Rating
Rating
Weighted	Rating
Rating
Weighted	Rating

Installation
3
14%
0
0
6
0.86
4
0.57
5
0.71
4
0.57
4
0.57
7
1.00
4
0.57
10
1.43
7
1.00
10
1.43
4
0.57
8
1.14
3
0.43

Criteria
Works	in	most	homes Amount	of	water	saved Cost	(Up-front	+	ongoing) Chance	of	leakage
3
4
1
2
14%
19%
5%
10%
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
6
8
5
10
0.86
1.52
0.24
0.95
6
8
5
10
0.86
1.52
0.24
0.95
5
8
3
10
0.71
1.52
0.14
0.95
5
8
3
10
0.71
1.52
0.14
0.95
4
6
4
10
0.57
1.14
0.19
0.95
8
4
9
3
1.14
0.76
0.43
0.29
7
4
4
6
1.00
0.76
0.19
0.57
8
3
5
10
1.14
0.57
0.24
0.95
6
6
4
8
0.86
1.14
0.19
0.76
#REF!
2
10
3
#REF!
0.38
0.48
0.29
3
1
4
5
0.43
0.19
0.19
0.48
#REF!
1
8
8
#REF!
0.19
0.38
0.76
3
6
4
5
0.43
1.14
0.19
0.48

Safety
3
14%
0
0
9
1.29
9
1.29
9
1.29
9
1.29
10
1.43
2
0.29
5
0.71
7
1.00
6
0.86
1
0.14
8
1.14
6
0.86
10
1.43

Cleanliness/	odor	of	water
2
10%
0
0
8
0.76
8
0.76
8
0.76
8
0.76
8
0.76
8
0.76
4
0.38
8
0.76
3
0.29
10
0.95
8
0.76
4
0.38
4
0.38

Aesthetics
1
5%
0
0
8
0.38
8
0.38
5
0.24
5
0.24
10
0.48
2
0.10
10
0.48
6
0.29
2
0.10
1
0.05
#REF!
#REF!
1
0.05
8
0.38

Ease	of	use
2
10%
0
0
10
0.95
10
0.95
10
0.95
10
0.95
10
0.95
3
0.29
6
0.57
6
0.57
8
0.76
4
0.38
#REF!
#REF!
#REF!
#REF!
10
0.95

Total
21
100%
0
0
70
7.81
68
7.52
63
7.29
62
7.14
66
7.05
46
5.05
50
5.24
63
6.95
50
5.95
#REF!
#REF!
#REF!
#REF!
#REF!
#REF!
53
5.81

Appendix E: Design Hazard Checklist

ME 428/429/430 Senior Design Project

2016-2017

DESIGN HAZARD CHECKLIST

Rossman
Grey Water Capture
Team: _______________________________________
Advisor: _____________________
Y

N
1. Will any part of the design create hazardous revolving, reciprocating, running, shearing,
punching, pressing, squeezing, drawing, cutting, rolling, mixing or similar action, including
pinch points and sheer points?
2. Can any part of the design undergo high accelerations/decelerations?
3. Will the system have any large moving masses or large forces?
4. Will the system produce a projectile?
5. Would it be possible for the system to fall under gravity creating injury?
6. Will a user be exposed to overhanging weights as part of the design?
7. Will the system have any sharp edges?
8. Will any part of the electrical systems not be grounded?
9. Will there be any large batteries or electrical voltage in the system above 40 V?
10. Will there be any stored energy in the system such as batteries, flywheels, hanging weights
or pressurized fluids?
11. Will there be any explosive or flammable liquids, gases, or dust fuel as part of the system?
12. Will the user of the design be required to exert any abnormal effort or physical posture
during the use of the design?
13. Will there be any materials known to be hazardous to humans involved in either the design
or the manufacturing of the design?
14. Can the system generate high levels of noise?
15. Will the device/system be exposed to extreme environmental conditions such as fog,
humidity, cold, high temperatures, etc?
16. Is it possible for the system to be used in an unsafe manner?
17. Will there be any other potential hazards not listed above? If yes, please explain on reverse.

For any “Y” responses, add (1) a complete description, (2) a list of corrective actions to be taken, and (3)
date to be completed on the reverse side.
Figure 4: Design Hazard Checklist, Page 1

Student Success Guide

17

ME 428/429/430 Senior Design Project
Description of Hazard

2016-2017
Planned Corrective Action

Spinning pump, could
pinch fingers

Warning label and clear instructions
in instruction manual.

Heavy water tank
placed on top of
toilet resevoir

Ensure the tank will be firmly
mounted to shelves. Warning in
instruction manual.

Warn the user in the instruction
Potential for sharp
edges on tank, pump, manual, round edges when
possible.
and inlet
System will have
tank up high, stored
potential energy

Bolt the tank to shelves

System will be
operating in hot/
humid
bathroom

Use a waterproof pump, test to
ensure safe operation. Instruct
user to run ventilation fan.

Potential for unsafe
use

There is always the possibility for
things to be used unsafely, need
good disclaimers in instruction
manual.

Figure 5: Design Hazard Checklist, Page 2

Student Success Guide

18

Planned Actual
Date
Date

Appendix F: Project Gantt Chart

Exported on June 1, 2017 5:32:50 PM PDT

Page 1 of 2

Exported on June 1, 2017 5:32:50 PM PDT

Page 2 of 2

Appendix G: Analysis of Top Design

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

1

3

F

F
Tubing will be cut
to length at the time
of installation so will be
left undefined on
drawings.

4
7

E

7

2

1

5

6

33.00
31.00

1

E

D

C

B

D

7

5233K66

-

1/2 in. Tubing

PVC

6

-

0007

Inlet Sub Assembly

-

1

5

-

0009

Pump Sub Assembly

-

1

4

-

0005

Float Switch Sub Assembly

-

1

3

-

0004

Tubing-Tank Interface Sub Assembly

-

1

2

-

0003

Tank to Toilet Line Sub Assembly

-

1

1

-

0002

Tank to Shelf Attachment Sub Assembly

-

1

ITEM
NO.

PART NO.

DRAWING NO.

DESCRIPTION

MATERIAL

McMaster Carr

VENDOR

DO NOT SCALE DRAWING

C

QTY.

B

REVISION 1

Grey Water Capture
TOLERANCES:

X.XX = ± .25 IN.

X.XXX = ± .050 IN.
ANGLES = ± 5°

A

NAME

SIGNATURE

DATE

DRAWN

Paul Brenneman

2/1/17

CHK'D

Vicente Ramirez

2/1/17

APPV'D Kevin Alexander

2/1/17

TITLE:

Main Assembly

MATERIAL:

DWG NO.

-

UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED

SCALE:1:15

8 Educational Product.
7 For Instructional Use
6 Only.
SOLIDWORKS

5

A

UNIT: INCH

4

3

2

0001

A3
SHEET 1 OF 1

1

8

7

6

5

4

3

F

2

1

F

2

E

E

D

5
2

D

D

4
3

DETAIL D
SCALE 1 : 5

1

C

B

DETAIL D
SCALE 1 : 5

C

5

94895A810

-

5/16 in. - 24 Nut

Steel

McMaster Carr

4

4

91525A133

-

5/16 in ID, 2 in. OD Washer

Steel

McMaster Carr

4

3

92620A614

-

5/16 in. - 24 x 3 in. Bolt

Steel

McMaster Carr

4

2

0008
-

30 Gal. Tank
Wire Shelving

Plastic
Steel

AdventureRV.net
Home Depot

1

1

W0064
1001844191

ITEM NO.

PART NUMBER

DRAWING NO.

DESCRIPTION

MATERIAL

VENDOR

QTY.

DO NOT SCALE DRAWING

TOLERANCES:

A

NAME

SIGNATURE

DATE

DRAWN

Paul Brenneman

2/1/17

CHK'D

Vicente Ramirez

2/1/17

APPV'D Kevin Alexander

2/1/17

UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED

TITLE:

5

REVISION 1

MATERIAL:

Tank to Shelf Attachment Sub
Assembly

DWG NO.

SCALE:1:10

8 Educational Product.
7 For Instructional Use
6 Only.
SOLIDWORKS

B

Grey Water Capture

X.XX = ± .25 IN.

X.XXX = ± .050 IN.
ANGLES = ± 5°

1

4

3

2

A

0002

A3
SHEET 1 OF 1

1

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

F

F

1

2

E

D

E

D

3
TOLERANCES:

X.XX = ± .25 IN.

X.XXX = ± .050 IN.
ANGLES = ± 5°

C

6

5

B

4

UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED

C

6
5

7746K390
4568K171

Backflow Prevention Valve
Pipe Nipple

Brass
Brass

McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr

1
1

4

4429K253

3528T23

Brass
Brass

McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr

1

3

Tee Junction
Barbed Fitting

1

2

5463K861

Barbed Through Wall Fitting

Nylon

McMaster Carr

1

1

5233K66

1/2 in. Tubing

PVC

McMaster Carr

1

ITEM NO.

PART NUMBER

DESCRIPTION

MATERIAL

VENDOR

QTY.

DO NOT SCALE DRAWING

B

REVISION 1

Grey Water Capture
NAME

A

SIGNATURE

DATE

DRAWN

Paul Brenneman

2/1/17

CHK'D

Vicente Ramirez

2/1/17

APPV'D Kevin Alexander

2/1/17

TITLE:

Tank to Toilet Line Sub
Assembly

DWG NO.

MATERIAL:

SCALE:1:2

8 Educational Product.
7 For Instructional Use
6 Only.
SOLIDWORKS

A

UNIT: INCH

5

4

3

2

0003

A3
SHEET 1 OF 1

1

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

F

F

E

E

Barbed fitting will be mounted on tank,
Slide 1/2 in. tubing over barb to secure
it in place.

1

2

D

D

TOLERANCES:

C

X.XX = ± .25 IN.

C

X.XXX = ± .050 IN.
ANGLES = ± 5°
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED

B

2

5463K861

Barbed Through Wall Fitting

Nylon

McMaster Carr

1

1

5233K66

1/2 in. Tubing

PVC

McMaster Carr

1

ITEM NO.

PART NUMBER

DESCRIPTION

MATERIAL

VENDOR

QTY.

DO NOT SCALE DRAWING

B

REVISION 1

Grey Water Capture
NAME

A

SIGNATURE

DATE

DRAWN

Paul Brenneman

2/1/17

CHK'D

Vicente Ramirez

2/1/17

APPV'D Kevin Alexander

2/1/17

TITLE:

Tubing-Tank Interface Sub
Assembly
UNIT: INCH
MATERIAL:

DWG NO.

SCALE:1:2

8 Educational Product.
7 For Instructional Use
6 Only.
SOLIDWORKS

5

4

3

2

0004

A3
SHEET 1 OF 1

1

A

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

3
5

F

F
1
4

5

E

E

4

D

D

2
TOLERANCES:

X.XX = ± .25 IN.

X.XXX = ± .050 IN.
ANGLES = ± 5°
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED

C

B

5

94758A105

10-32 Flanged Nut

Stainless Steel

McMaster Carr

2

4

92196A267

10-32 Socket Head Cap Screw

Stainless Steel

McMaster Carr

2

3

91862A306

1/8 NPT Panel Nut

Stainless Steel

McMaster Carr

1

2

10010988868

Float Switch

-

Home Depot

1

1

0006

Float Switch Bracket

Low Carbon Steel

Team Manufactured

1

ITEM NO.

PART NUMBER

DESCRIPTION

MATERIAL

VENDOR
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING

C

QUANTITY B
REVISION 1

Grey Water Capture
NAME

A

SIGNATURE

DATE

DRAWN

Paul Brenneman

2/1/17

CHK'D

Vicente Ramirez

2/1/17

APPV'D Kevin Alexander

2/1/17

TITLE:

MATERIAL:

Float Switch Sub
Assembly

DWG NO.

SCALE:1:2

8 Educational Product.
7 For Instructional Use
6 Only.
SOLIDWORKS

5

4

3

2

0005

A
A3

SHEET 1 OF 1

1

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

.50

F
1.59

F

.41

E

E
A
C

90
°

2x

D

.125 A B C
4.00

.050 A

2.00

.75

3.81

D

.19

.19

B

TOLERANCES:

X.XXX = ± .050 IN.
ANGLES = ± 5°
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED

2.81

C

X.XX = ± .25 IN.

C

2x .50

1.00

1

8910K395

1/8" X 1" X 6" BAR

Low Carbon Steel

McMaster Carr

1

ITEM NO.

PART NUMBER

DESCRIPTION

MATERIAL

VENDOR

QTY.

NOTE:
TANK WILL BE PURCHASED AND HOLES WILL
BE DRILLED BY TEAM.

B

B
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING

REVISION 1

Grey Water Capture
NAME

A

SIGNATURE

DATE

DRAWN

Paul Brenneman

2/1/17

CHK'D

Vicente Ramirez

2/1/17

APPV'D Kevin Alexander

2/1/17

TITLE:

Switch Bracket

MATERIAL:

DWG NO.

Low Carbon Steel
SCALE:1:3

8 Educational Product.
7 For Instructional Use
6 Only.
SOLIDWORKS

A

UNIT: INCH

5

4

3

2

0006

A3
SHEET 1 OF 1

1

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

F

F

3

4

1

E

E
SUCTION CUP AND FILTER
PAPER WILL BOTH BE HELD
IN PLACE BY THE CABLE TIE.

D

D

2

TOLERANCES:

X.XX = ± .25 IN.

X.XXX = ± .050 IN.
ANGLES = ± 5°

C

C

UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED

B

4

8997T61
5463K86

Filter Felt Sheet
Cable Tie

Carbon
Nylon

McMaster Carr
McMaster Carr

3

1

2

78410

Suction Cup

-

Amazon

1

1

5233K66

1/2 in. Tubing

PVC

McMaster Carr

1

ITEM NO.

PART NUMBER

DESCRIPTION

MATERIAL

VENDOR

QTY.

DO NOT SCALE DRAWING

1

B

REVISION 1

Grey Water Capture
NAME

A

SIGNATURE

DATE

DRAWN

Paul Brenneman

2/1/17

CHK'D

Vicente Ramirez

2/1/17

APPV'D Kevin Alexander

2/1/17

TITLE:

Inlet Sub Assembly

MATERIAL:

DWG NO.

SCALE:1:2

8 Educational Product.
7 For Instructional Use
6 Only.
SOLIDWORKS

A

UNIT: INCH

5

4

3

2

0007

A3
SHEET 1 OF 1

1

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

R.38

F

F
1.50

OUTLET

A
32.65

E

17.40

.19

.25
.050

4x

.1

.015

.33 .015 .1
.25 L C A B
.050

M

B A C

L
M

2x 7.50

15
.0
0
.5

2x

8.75

D

C

2X 5.50

5

TOP

.0 0

6.00

6.00

2x 5.00

.1

E

C

D

B

B

BOTTOM
BACK
2.00

2.00

2x 3.65

2x 5.10

13.40
W0064

30 Gal. Tank

POLYETHELYNE

AdventureRV.net

1

ITEM NO.

PART
NUMBER

DESCRIPTION

MATERIAL

VENDOR

QTY.

2.00

iNLET
5
.54 .01

0 .1

NOTE:
TANK WILL BE PURCHASED AND HOLES WILL
BE DRILLED BY TEAM.

11.80

B

B
DO NOT SCALE DRAWING

TOLERANCES:

A

C

1

2.00

C

Grey Water Capture

X.XX = ± .25 IN.

X.XXX = ± .050 IN.
ANGLES = ± 5°

NAME

34.15

SIGNATURE

DATE

DRAWN

Paul Brenneman

2/1/17

CHK'D

Vicente Ramirez

2/1/17

APPV'D Kevin Alexander

2/1/17

TITLE:

Tank
A

UNIT: INCH
MATERIAL:

DWG NO.

-

UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED

SCALE:1:3

8 Educational Product.
7 For Instructional Use
6 Only.
SOLIDWORKS

REVISION 1

5

4

3

2

0008

A3
SHEET 1 OF 1

1

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

F

F

E

E
2

1

2

D

D

TOLERANCES:

C

X.XX = ± .25 IN.

C

X.XXX = ± .050 IN.
ANGLES = ± 5°
UNLESS OTHERWISE SPECIFIED

B

2

5346K36

1

2088-594-154

ITEM NO.

PART NUMBER

Barbed Hose Fitting

Brass

McMaster Carr

2

SHURflo Pump

-

Amazon

1

DESCRIPTION

MATERIAL

VENDOR

QTY.

DO NOT SCALE DRAWING

B

REVISION 1

Grey Water Capture
NAME

A

SIGNATURE

DATE

DRAWN

Paul Brenneman

2/1/17

CHK'D

Vicente Ramirez

2/1/17

APPV'D Kevin Alexander

2/1/17

TITLE:

Tubing-Tank Interface Sub
Assembly
UNIT: INCH
MATERIAL:

DWG NO.

SCALE:1:2

8 Educational Product.
7 For Instructional Use
6 Only.
SOLIDWORKS

5

4

3

2

0009

A3
SHEET 1 OF 1

1

A

Prepared by: _____________________________

Product: _____________________________
Team: _____________________________

Date: ________________ (orig)

Tube not submerged
Capture

Does not aquire water

8 Water level low

7

56 Suction cup inlet mount

9 Tripping and slipping

3

27

8 Tube floats

1

8 Suction cup inlet mount

Streamlined tube
position

Responsibility &
Target
Completion Date

Actions Taken

Criticality

Recommended
Action(s)

Occurence

Potential Cause(s) /
Mechanism(s) of
Failure

Severity

Potential Effect(s) of
Failure

Criticality

Potential Failure Mode

Occurence

Item /
Function

Severity

Action Results

Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th

8
Not enough suction

Not enough power
Transport

Does not transport water
Leakage
Odors/cleanliness

8 Not enough pump power

1

0
0
0

8 Not enough pump power

1

8

5 Manufacture defect

2

10

5 Bad installation

3

15

4
4

20
20

1

9

1

8

1

8

8 Bad installation

3

24

8 Manufacture defect
8 Tank rupture
5 Dirty water

2
1
4

16
8
20

8 Fatigue

3

24

8 Poor installation

4

32

8 Manufacture defect
8 Dirty water

2
4

16
32

9 Pipes on the floor

3

27

Valve stuck open,
overflow

1

10

1

10

1

9

2

18

Smells/ bacterial growth/ 5 Store water too long
discolored water
5 Dirty water
9 High pressure

Tank Cracks/ Leaks

Water on floor

Ceramic pieces on floor
Valve gets stuck

Deliver

Manufacture (stress
conc.)
8 Overflow
8

Store

Does not deliver water

Tube disconnects

Tripping

10
Electrocution
Safety

10 Leakage

Hazard

9

Valve stuck open,
overflow

Slipping
9 Water in shower

Copy of DFMEA.xlsx

Page 1 of 1

Thorough design and
analysis
Thorough design and
analysis
Quality control
Clear instructions,
simple design
Not oversizing tank
Filter
Thorough design and
analysis
Thorough design and
analysis
Overflow return line
Clear instructions,
simple design
Quality control
Overflow return line
Filter

Completed

Completed
Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th

Thorough design and
Team, Jan 25th
analysis, material choice
Clear instructions,
simple design
Quality control
Filter
Streamlined tube
position
Filter, overflow return
line
Thorough design and
analysis
Filter, overflow return
line

Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th
Team, Jan 25th

Recommend use of bath
Team, Jan 25th
mat in owners manual

Revision Date: 2/9/2017

Part
SHURflow Pump
30 Gallon Tank
Float Switch
Shelf
Backflow Prevention Valve
Brass Barbed Fitting (Female)
Brass Barbed Fitting (Male)
Brass Pipe Nipples
Filter Sheet
Hex Panel Nut
Nylon Barbed Fitting
PVC Tubing
Socket Head Screw
Steel Flange Nut
Steel Hex Nut
Steel Rectangular Bar
Steel Washer
Suction Cup
Tee Joint (Pipe Fitting)
Zip Tie
Switch Tap

Distributer
Part Number
Amazon
2088-594-154
Ameri-Kart
W0064
Home Depot
1001098868
Home Depot
1001844191
McMaster-Carr
7746K39
McMaster-Carr
3528T23
McMaster-Carr
5346K36
McMaster-Carr
4568K171
McMaster-Carr
8997T61
McMaster-Carr
91862A306
McMaster-Carr
5463K86
McMaster-Carr
5233K66
McMaster-Carr
92196A267
McMaster-Carr
94758A105
McMaster-Carr
94895A810
McMaster-Carr
8910K395
McMaster-Carr
91525A133
McMaster-Carr
65825A3
McMaster-Carr
4429K253
McMaster-Carr
7130K53
Walmart
C22-011470-00W

Cost (each)
$78.99
$69.10
$36.98
$39.97
$29.83
$3.96
$5.90
$2.29
$7.35
$3.80
$1.29
$.42/ft
$0.08
$3.80
$0.05
$1.44
$1.42
$0.39
$7.97
$4.80
$7.50

Quantity
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
10
25 ft
100
2
100
1
5
25
1
1
1

Cost (quantity)
$78.99
$69.10
$36.98
$39.97
$29.83
$3.96
$11.80
$2.29
$7.35
$3.80
$12.86
$10.50
$7.57
$7.60
$5.29
$1.44
$7.12
$9.68
$7.97
$4.80
$7.50

Shipping
FREE
$18.35
FREE
FREE
$4
$2
$2
$1
$2
$1
$2
$5
$3
$2
$2
$2
$2
$3
$2
$1
FREE
Total Cost:

Part Cost
$78.99
$87.45
$36.98
$39.97
$33.83
$5.96
$13.80
$3.29
$9.35
$4.80
$14.86
$13.50
$10.57
$9.60
$7.29
$3.44
$9.12
$12.68
$9.97
$5.80
$7.50
$418.75

Tax
$6.32
$7.00
$2.96
$3.20
$2.71
$0.48
$1.10
$0.26
$0.75
$0.38
$1.19
$1.08
$0.85
$0.77
$0.58
$0.28
$0.73
$1.01
$0.80
$0.46
$0.60
$33.50

Total Cost
$85.31
$94.45
$39.94
$43.17
$36.54
$6.44
$14.90
$3.55
$10.10
$5.18
$16.05
$14.58
$11.42
$10.37
$7.87
$3.72
$9.85
$13.69
$10.77
$6.26
$8.10
$452.25

Weight (lbs)
5
15
1.25
25
1
1
1
1
0.1
1
1
1
1
1
1
8
0.5
0.3
3
0.1
1

Sponsor

Michael Allwein

TEST PLAN
Item No
Quantity

Specification or Clause Reference

Test Type

Type

Start date

1

Pump flowrate > shower
flowrate

Testing

2

Installation Time

Similitude

3
4

Maintenance Frequency
Leakage Test

Similitude
Inspection

5

Manual Labor

Inspection

6

Tank Tipping

Testing

7

Minimum Water Height

Testing

8

Float Switch

Testing

Test Description
Equipment Required
Acceptance Criteria Test Responsibility Test Stage SAMPLES TESTED TIMING
Finish date
Status
Measure pump flowrate and
compare to average shower
flowrate
Stop watch, water
> 2.1 gpm
ALL
DV
1
B
5/11/17 5/11/17 Complete
Estimate complete installation
time for system based on
individual installation steps
Necessary installation tools
Less than 1 hour
ALL
DV
1
B
5/11/17 5/11/17 Complete
Look at similar systems to
Every 3 monthes or
estimate maintenance frequency No additional equipment.
less frequently
ALL
DV
1
B
5/11/17 5/11/17 Complete
Inspect the system for leaks
No additional equipment.
No leaks
ALL
DV
1
B
5/11/17 5/11/17 Complete
Inspect system to ensure no
maual labor is required
No additional equipment.
No manual labor
ALL
DV
1
B
5/11/17 5/11/17 Complete
Apply lateral forces and observe
system behavior
No additional equipment.
Tank does not tip
ALL
DV
1
B
5/11/17 5/11/17 Complete
Measure the minimum water level
height which the system is able to
pump water to the storage tank
Check that the float switch
properly switches off pump

Water

> 1/2 in. of water

ALL

DV

1

B

5/11/17 5/11/17 Complete

Water

Switches off

ALL

DV

!

B

5/11/17 5/11/17 Complete

HDX 60 in. H x 23.23 in. W x 13.39 in. D 6-Shelf Storage Unit-SL-THDUS-006C - The Home Depot

2/9/17, 6:45 PM

Home / Storage & Organization / Garage Storage / Garage Shelves & Racks / Garage Shelving Units
Model # SL-THDUS-006C

Internet #207132406

Store SKU #1001844191

HDX

60 in. H x 23.23 in. W x
13.39 in. D 6-Shelf Storage
Unit
(1)

Write a Review

Answers (6)

$39.97

Quantity

Save to List
Pick Up In Store

-

Questions &

/each

1

+

We'll Ship It to You
Express Delivery

Unavailable at S Beaverton
0

Expect it
as soon as tomorrow

in stock

Check Nearby Stores
You choose the time and place, we'll deliver!
See your options in checkout.

Your local store: S Beaverton
Store Details & Services

Product Overview
Get your rooms organized by adding extra storage space with this shelving unit. It is versatile enough to be positioned anywhere in the home,
such as in your laundry room, kitchen, garage and many other rooms. The shelves can hold a great deal of stuff - each one can accommodate up
to 250 lbs. when the weight is evenly distributed. This unit lets you neatly store all your belongings in your house.
Weight capacity of 1500 lbs. total (when evenly distributed)
Steel construction for strength and durability

http://www.homedepot.com/p/HDX-60-in-H-x-23-23-in-W-x-13-39-in-D-6-Shelf-Storage-Unit-SL-THDUS-006C/207132406

Page 1 of 2

HDX 60 in. H x 23.23 in. W x 13.39 in. D 6-Shelf Storage Unit-SL-THDUS-006C - The Home Depot

2/9/17, 6:45 PM

6-adjustable shelves to house a variety of food, laundry supplies, tools and more
Easy, no-tool assembly
Adjustable legs for leveling on uneven floors

Speciﬁcations
Dimensions
Assembled Depth (in.)

13.39 in

Assembled Width (in.)

23.23 in

Assembled Height (in.)

60.00 in

Shelf Weight Capacity (lb)

250

Color Family

Chrome

Number of Shelves

6

Color/Finish

chrome

Shelf Material

Wire

Durability

General purpose

Storage Product Type

Shelving Units

Features

No Additional Features

Total Weight Capacity (lb.)

1500

Material

Steel

Details

Warranty / Certiﬁcations
Manufacturer Warranty

N/A

http://www.homedepot.com/p/HDX-60-in-H-x-23-23-in-W-x-13-39-in-D-6-Shelf-Storage-Unit-SL-THDUS-006C/207132406

Page 2 of 2

AmazonSmile: Cruiser Accessories 78410 Suction Cups, Clear, 4 pack: Automotive

suction cup

All

Supporting: Navy SEAL Foundation
Browsing History
Paul's Amazon.com

Departments
Automotive

Your Garage

Select your vehicle:

2/8/17, 10:26 AM

Deals & Rebates

Year

Best Sellers

Make

Parts

Model

Hello, Paul

Today's Deals
Accessories

Account & Lists
Tools & Equipment

Car Care

Orders

0

Prime

Motorcycle & Powersports

Go

Cart

Truck

Your Garage (1)

‹ Back to search results for "suction cup"

Cruiser Accessories

Sub
mit

Share

Cruiser Accessories 78410 Suction
Cups, Clear, 4 pack

Sub
mit

85 customer reviews
| 6 answered questions

Sub
mit

Price:

Add-on Item
Ships with any qualifying order over
$25. Details

$2.00 Free shipping for Prime members when

Qty:

buying this Add-on Item. Details
Your cost could be $0.00: Qualified customers get $5 in Gift
Card funds on first $100 reload of their Amazon Gift Card
Balance. Learn more

Add
to to
Cart
Add
Cart
1-Click ordering is not available for

In Stock.

this item.

Want it Friday, Feb. 10? Add it to a qualifying order within 23
hrs 48 mins and choose One-Day Shipping at checkout.
Details
Ships from and sold by Amazon.com.
Eligible for

Click to open expanded view

1

donation.

These multi-purpose suction cups are designed for use
with novelty plates to help keep the novelty/license plate
secure
Made of durable, clear plastic
Versatile uses
Includes four (4) clear suction cups
User friendly and easy to install, see back of package for
installation instructions
Multi-purpose accessory-ideal for use with novelty plates
Packaging Dimensions: 4.5 x 1.8 x 0.8 inches
Individual product diameter is approximately 1 inch

› See more product details
Add-on Item

This item is available because of the Add-on program
The Add-on program allows Amazon to offer thousands of
low-priced items that would be cost-prohibitive to ship on their
own. These items ship with qualifying orders over $25. Details

Ship to:
Paul Brenneman- San Luis Obisp 93401
Add to List
Add to your Dash Buttons

Other Sellers on Amazon

$5.93

Add to Cart

+ Free Shipping
Sold by: Auto License Plates and Frames

$5.94

Add to Cart

+ Free Shipping
Sold by: Prime SuperStore

$8.00

Add to Cart

+ Free Shipping
Sold by: Envy Cart
Used & new (9) from $2.00 & FREE

Used & new (9) from $2.00 & FREE shipping.
Report incorrect product information.

shipping.
Have one to sell?

Sell on Amazon

Frequently Bought Together
Total price: $20.99

https://smile.amazon.com/Cruiser-Accessories-78410-Suction-Clear/…EA/ref=sr_1_8?ie=UTF8&qid=1486578213&sr=8-8&keywords=suction+cup#

Page 1 of 7

AmazonSmile: Cruiser Accessories 78410 Suction Cups, Clear, 4 pack: Automotive

2/8/17, 10:26 AM

AddSubmit
both to Cart
AddSubmit
both to List

+

These items are shipped from and sold by different sellers. Show details

This item: Cruiser Accessories 78410 Suction Cups, Clear, 4 pack $2.00

Add-on Item

mDesign Wide Shower Caddy, Storage for Shampoo, Conditioner, Soap - Satin/White $18.99

Sponsored Products Related To This Item (What's this?)

Leadrise® 5 inch
Aluminum Suction Cup
Puller Lifter 110 Lbs. Dent
Remover,glass,…

Car Sun Shade by
NimNik Baby, 2-Pack,
Black

Car Phone Mount Holder,
LESHP Universal Car Air
Vent Phone Holder Car
Bracket with Multi…

22

45

6

$8.97

$15.99

$11.98
Ad feedback

Customers Who Bought This Item Also Bought

CLIP ON PLASTIC
SUCTION CUPS by
Starlight and Sunny, easy
to stick, easy to remove,…
19

Clear Plastic Suction Cups
with Loops, 4.5 cm (1.75 in)
Wide, Set of 10

Double Sided Suction
Cups, 20 mm, Set of 10,
Clear

6

$8.95

Page 1 of 5

29

Cruiser Accessories 76200
Tuf Flat Shield Novelty /
License Plate Shield,
Smoke

Adams Manufacturing
6000-74-3040 2-1/2-Inch
Suction Cup Hook, Large,
2-Pack

270

$7.95
$7.28

$9.90

479

$5.23

Special Offers and Product Promotions
Your cost could be $0.00 instead of $2.00! Get a $70 Amazon.com Gift Card instantly upon approval for the Amazon Prime Rewards
Visa Card Apply now

Product Information

Technical Details

Additional Information

Brand

Cruiser Accessories

ASIN

Item Weight

0.3 ounces

Customer Reviews

B00032KBEA

https://smile.amazon.com/Cruiser-Accessories-78410-Suction-Clear/…EA/ref=sr_1_8?ie=UTF8&qid=1486578213&sr=8-8&keywords=suction+cup#

Page 2 of 7

AmazonSmile: Cruiser Accessories 78410 Suction Cups, Clear, 4 pack: Automotive

Product Dimensions

4.5 x 1.8 x 0.8 inches

Item model number

78410

Manufacturer Part Number

78410

2/8/17, 10:26 AM

85 customer
reviews
4.1 out of 5 stars
Best Sellers Rank

#8,461 in Automotive (See top 100)
#15 in Automotive > Exterior
Accessories > License Plate
Covers & Frames > Fasteners

Shipping Weight

0.3 ounces (View shipping rates
and policies)

Domestic Shipping

Item can be shipped within U.S.

International Shipping

This item can be shipped to select
countries outside of the U.S. Learn
More

Date First Available

September 14, 2005

Warranty & Support
Warranty, Parts: Parts

Feedback
If you are a seller for this product, would you like to suggest updates through
seller support?
Would you like to tell us about a lower price?

Important Information
Safety Warning
None

Product Description
These multi-purpose suction cups are designed for use with novelty plates. Cruiser Accessories is a family owned business that has been manufacturing and selling
license plate frames for over 30 years. Through innovation, attention to detail and many patented designs, Cruiser has evolved into the largest supplier of license
plate frames, novelty plate shields and mounting hardware in the automotive aftermarket. Cruiser's product line also includes both standard and exclusive Star Pin
locking hardware, designer fastener caps, mounting accessories, motorcycle frames and 3d-Cals decals. Let Cruiser Accessories complete your ride’s look today!

Customers Who Viewed This Item Also Viewed

Shower Caddy Connectors
by Better Houseware
197

$5.00

Holiday Joy - WORLD'S
STRONGEST All Purpose
2-1/2-Inch Suction Cups
with Hooks - Made in…

Page 1 of 11

Darice Suction Cup without
Hooks, 20mm

2 Pack Darice Suction Cup
without Hooks, 20mm

102

$6.59

69

$4.99

Source One Premium
Large 1 3/4-Inch 44mm
Clear Suction Cups, 6 Pack
(S1-6suction)

82

$7.99

35

$7.97

Sponsored Products Related To This Item (What's this?)

https://smile.amazon.com/Cruiser-Accessories-78410-Suction-Clear/…EA/ref=sr_1_8?ie=UTF8&qid=1486578213&sr=8-8&keywords=suction+cup#

Page 3 of 7

Ameri-Kart Fresh Water Holding RV Tank 30 Gallon W0064 - $69.10

2/5/17, 8:48 PM

RV Parts & Accessories
Serving RV'ers Since 1982
Search

HOME

MY ACCOUNT

0 ITEMS IN CART

Plumbing » Freshwater Plumbing » Tanks & Fittings » Ameri-Kart Fresh Water Holding RV Tank 30 Gallon W0064
Categories
Ameri-Kart Fresh Water Holding RV Tank 30 Gallon
CLEARANCE ITEMS
Marine
Mobile Home Parts/Accessories
RV Accessories
RV Antennas & Satellites
Electrical
Truck Camper Accessories
Truck Camper Parts
Major Appliances
Furniture & Books
RV Electronics & Gauges
RV Maintenance
Awnings & Covers
Hardware
LP Gas
Plumbing
Freshwater Plumbing
Faucets
Hose Fittings
Hoses
Pumps & Fittings
Tanks & Fittings
Water Fills & Accessories
Winterizing
Plumbing Fittings & Tubing
Sinks & Bathtubs
Wastewater Plumbing
Towing
Specials
Housewares
Lighting
Suspension
Open Box Buys
Scratch N Dent

$87.50 $69.10

CONTACT US

CHECKOUT

W0064
[A411-681460]
About this product...

Manufacturer's Number: W0064

View Larger Image
Shipping Cost
Customer Reviews
Ameri-Kart
Ask a question

Add to Cart
Calculate Shipping

Water Tank 17 1/2" W X 34 1/4" L X 12" D Picture is Generic.

Also purchased with this product:

Suburban Drop-In 3-Burner Stainless
Steel

12 Volt 2-Speed Heavy Duty Chrome
Fan

12V Mini Plate Receptacle

FloJet Triplex Water Pump

Double Bottle Rack, 30 lb. Cylinder Kit

LP Cylinder, 30 lbs.

RV Parts Special

Aluminum King Pin 5th Fifth Wheel Tripod
Stabilizer Jack

RV Parts Special

Cynder 24" Scissor Jacks Set of 2 5000 lbs
RV Camper 5th Wheel

Information
Shipping & Returns
FAQs
RV Links
Gift Voucher FAQ
Contact Us
Adventure RV Reviews
Site Map for RV Parts
Become a Fan on Facebook
Find us on Google+

Secure Shopping

http://www.adventurerv.net/amerikart-fresh-water-holding-tank-gallon-w0064-p-30341.html?osCsid=38tf92r89ic6j0u42jh9o3q6j2

Page 1 of 2

Everbilt Vertical Float Switch for Sump Pumps-EBPBV - The Home Depot

2/5/17, 8:37 PM

Home / Plumbing / Pumps / Pump Accessories / Pump Switches
Model # EBPBV

Internet #205618047

Everbilt

Store SKU #1001098868

Vertical Float Switch for
Sump Pumps
(14)

Write a Review

$36.98

Quantity

Save to List

-

/each

1

+

Pick Up In Store Today

We'll Ship It to You

Add to Cart

Add to Cart

Your store only has 3 in stock.
Free store
at SorBeaverton
Please
reduce pickup
your quantity
change your
pickup store to check stock nearby.
3 in stock
Change Pickup Store

Or buy now with

Questions &
Answers (7)

Free Shipping on $45 order
Expect it
February 9 - February 13
See Shipping Options

We're unable to ship this item to:
AK,GU,HI,PR,VI

Schedule delivery as soon as
tomorrow

Product Overview
This vertical float switch is a replacement switch for sump and sewage pumps. This float switch is compatible with various sump pumps and
includes brackets and clamps for installation to the discharge pipe. Use of this vertical float switch is ideal for use in small diameter pits or basins.
California residents: see Proposition 65 information
Approximately a 4 in. on/off span
On/off height can be adjusted by moving rubber grommet

http://www.homedepot.com/p/Everbilt-Vertical-Float-Switch-for-Sum…618047?MERCH=REC-_-PIPHorizontal1_rr-_-202042665-_-205618047-_-N

Page 1 of 2

Everbilt Vertical Float Switch for Sump Pumps-EBPBV - The Home Depot

2/5/17, 8:37 PM

8 ft. cord
Works with pumps up to 1/2 HP at 120 VAC and 1 HP at 230 VAC
115-Volt plug attached can be removed for direct wiring

Speciﬁcations
Dimensions
Product Depth (in.)

3.75

Product Height (in.)

4.53

Product Width (in.)

2.6

Returnable

90-Day

Details
Brand compatibility

Compatible with all models

Product Weight (lb.)

1.25lb

Warranty / Certiﬁcations
Manufacturer Warranty

1 year

http://www.homedepot.com/p/Everbilt-Vertical-Float-Switch-for-Sum…618047?MERCH=REC-_-PIPHorizontal1_rr-_-202042665-_-205618047-_-N

Page 2 of 2

McMaster-Carr - 18-8 Stainless Steel Flange Nut, 10-32 Thread Size

18-8 Stainless Steel Flange Nut

2/5/17, 8:22 PM

In stock
$3.80 Each
94758A105

10-32 Thread Size

Material

18-8 Stainless Steel

Thread Size

10-32

Thread Type

UNF

Thread Spacing

Fine

Thread Fit

Class 2B

Thread Direction

Right Hand

Width

3/8"

Height

5/16"

Flange
Diameter

1/2"

Thickness

0.06"

Drive Style

External Hex

Nut Type

Flange

Hex Nut Profile

Standard

System of Measurement

Inch

RoHS

Compliant

Made from 18-8 stainless steel, these flange nuts have good chemical resistance. The flange
distributes pressure where the nut meets the material surface, eliminating the need for a
separate washer. Height includes the flange.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#94758a105/=168bf7i

Page 1 of 2

McMaster-Carr - 18-8 Stainless Steel Flange Nut, 10-32 Thread Size

2/5/17, 8:22 PM

The information in this 3-D model is provided for reference only.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#94758a105/=168bf7i

Page 2 of 2

McMaster-Carr - 18-8 Stainless Steel Socket Head Screw, 10-32 Thread Size, 3/8" Long

18-8 Stainless Steel Socket Head Screw

In stock
$7.57 per pack of 100
92196A267

10-32 Thread Size, 3/8" Long

Thread Size

10-32

Length

3/8"

Threading

Fully Threaded

Head Diameter

0.312"

Head Height

0.19"

Drive Size

5/32"

Material

18-8 Stainless Steel

Hardness

Rockwell B70

Tensile Strength

70,000 psi

Screw Size Decimal
Equivalent

2/5/17, 8:35 PM

0.190"

Thread Type

UNF

Thread Spacing

Fine

Thread Fit

Class 3A

Thread Direction

Right Hand

Head Type

Socket

Socket Head Profile

Standard

Drive Style

Hex

System of Measurement

Inch

RoHS

Compliant

Made from 18-8 stainless steel, these screws have good chemical resistance and may be
mildly magnetic. Length is measured from under the head.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#92196a267/=168bfjr

Page 1 of 2

McMaster-Carr - 18-8 Stainless Steel Socket Head Screw, 10-32 Thread Size, 3/8" Long

2/5/17, 8:35 PM

The information in this 3-D model is provided for reference only.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#92196a267/=168bfjr

Page 2 of 2

McMaster-Carr - 316 Stainless Steel Washer, Oversized, 5/16" Screw Size, 0.344" ID, 2" OD

2/5/17, 9:41 PM

316 Stainless Steel Washer

In stock
$7.12 per pack of 5
91525A133

Oversized, 5/16" Screw Size, 0.344" ID, 2" OD

Material

316 Stainless Steel

For Screw Size

5/16"

ID

0.344"

OD

2.000"

Thickness

0.052"-0.072"

Washer Type

Flat

System of Measurement

Inch

Hardness

Not Rated

RoHS

Compliant

Compared to our general purpose washers, these have
exaggerated diameters and/or thicknesses for covering
oversized holes or for use as spacers and levelers.
316 stainless steel washers have excellent resistance to
chemicals and salt water. They may be mildly magnetic.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#91525a133/=168cfun

Page 1 of 2

McMaster-Carr - 316 Stainless Steel Washer, Oversized, 5/16" Screw Size, 0.344" ID, 2" OD

2/5/17, 9:41 PM

The information in this 3-D model is provided for reference only.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#91525a133/=168cfun

Page 2 of 2

McMaster-Carr - Backflow-Prevention Valve, for Water and Inert Gas, Brass Body, 1/2 NPT Female

Backflow-Prevention Valve

2/5/17, 9:52 PM

In stock
$29.83 Each
7746K39

for Water and Inert Gas, Brass Body, 1/2 NPT Female

Valve Function

Backflow Prevention

For Use With

Air, Inert Gas, Water

Activation

Pressure Driven

Connection Type

Pipe

Connection

Threaded NPT Female

Pipe Size

1/2

Maximum Pressure

400 psi @ 70° F

Minimum Opening Pressure

2 psi

Temperature Range

33° to 225° F

Material
Body

Brass

Seal

SBR

Shape

Straight

End-to-End Length

2 11/16"

Mounting Orientation

Any Position

Valve Type

Check

Check Valve Type

Spring Loaded

Flow Coefficient (Cv)

3

These valves open to allow flow in one direction and close when flow stops or
reverses.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#7746k39/=168ckyg

Page 1 of 2

McMaster-Carr - Backflow-Prevention Valve, for Water and Inert Gas, Brass Body, 1/2 NPT Female

2/5/17, 9:52 PM

The information in this 3-D model is provided for reference only.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#7746k39/=168ckyg

Page 2 of 2

McMaster-Carr - Brass Barbed Fitting for Drinking Water, Straight for 1/2" Tube ID x 1/2 Male Pipe Size

Brass Barbed Fitting for Drinking Water

2/5/17, 8:51 PM

In stock
$3.96 Each
3528T23

Straight for 1/2" Tube ID x 1/2 Male Pipe Size

For Tube ID

1/2"

Pipe Size

1/2

Maximum Pressure

160 psi @ 73° F

Temperature Range

–30° to 180° F

Tubing

Use with 51275K (PEX) polyethylene for drinking water

Additional Specifications

Straight Adapters, Tube-to-Male Threaded Pipe

RoHS

Compliant

When it comes to drinking water applications, these multi-barbed fittings are a handy
alternative to solder-joint copper tube fittings. They connect to tubing with a ring and
a crimping tool for a quick installation, with no heat or solvents required. Compatible
with Viega PEX fittings, they meet NSF/ANSI Standard 61 for use with hot and cold
drinking (potable) water. Material meets ASTM F1807.
Connections: Barbed or NPT threads.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#3528t23/=168bst7

Page 1 of 2

McMaster-Carr - Brass Barbed Fitting for Drinking Water, Straight for 1/2" Tube ID x 1/2 Male Pipe Size

2/5/17, 8:51 PM

The information in this 3-D model is provided for reference only.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#3528t23/=168bst7

Page 2 of 2

McMaster-Carr - Brass Barbed Hose Fitting, 1/2" ID, Swvls Until Tightened, 1/2 NPTF Male End

Brass Barbed Hose Fitting
1/2" ID, Swvls Until Tightened, 1/2 NPTF Male End

For Hose ID

1/2"

Pipe Size

1/2

Thread Type

NPTF

Swivel Type

Swivels Until Tightened

Connections

Barbed Male Hose Connection with Threaded Male Pipe
Connection

Maximum Pressure

120 psi @ 72° F

Temperature Range

-40° to 160° F

Maximum Vacuum

Not Rated

For Hose Type

Reinforced Rubber

Material

Brass

For Clamp Type

Low-Profile Band Clamps

Seal Material

Buna-N Rubber

Specifications Met

SAE J476

For Use With

Air, Water

Shape

Straight

Type

Adapter

RoHS

Not Compliant

2/6/17, 5:55 PM

In stock
$11.79 per pack of 2
5346K36

Also known as hose nipples, these fittings connect hose to threaded pipe. Fittings that swivel until tightened are
easy to install.
Brass fittings have good corrosion resistance and are softer and easier to thread than steel fittings.
NPTF (Dryseal) threads are compatible with NPT Threads. Female NPSM (National Pipe Straight Mechanical) threads
are compatible with male NPT threads.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#5346k36/=168s1ow

Page 1 of 2

McMaster-Carr - Brass Barbed Hose Fitting, 1/2" ID, Swvls Until Tightened, 1/2 NPTF Male End

2/6/17, 5:55 PM

The information in this 3-D model is provided for reference only.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#5346k36/=168s1ow

Page 2 of 2

McMaster-Carr - Durable Nylon Tight-Seal Barbed Tube Fitting, Through-Wall Straight for 1/2" Tube ID

Durable Nylon Tight-Seal Barbed Tube Fitting
Through-Wall Straight for 1/2" Tube ID

For Tube ID

1/2"

Pipe Size

1/4

Color

Semi-Clear White

RoHS

Compliant

2/5/17, 8:50 PM

In stock
$12.86 per pack of 10
5463K86

Minimize leaks in your lines—these single-barbed fittings have a smooth
surface that creates snug tubing connections. Use with water, air, and
hydraulic fluid, unless noted. These durable nylon fittings are also very
impact and abrasion resistant. Fittings can be sterilized with steam
(autoclaving), unless noted.
Connections: Barbed or NPT threads, except 10-32 are UNF straight threads,
and through-wall straights have an NPSM (National Pipe Straight Mechanical)
connection.
Also known as bulkhead couplings, these adapters require a 1/2" hole size.

Color: Semi-Clear White

https://www.mcmaster.com/#5463k86/=168bshz

Page 1 of 2

McMaster-Carr - Durable Nylon Tight-Seal Barbed Tube Fitting, Through-Wall Straight for 1/2" Tube ID

2/5/17, 8:50 PM

The information in this 3-D model is provided for reference only.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#5463k86/=168bshz

Page 2 of 2

McMaster-Carr - Hex Panel Nut, 18-8 Stainless Steel, 1/8 NPT, 1/8" High

Hex Panel Nut

2/5/17, 8:35 PM

In stock
$3.80 per pack of 1
91862A306

18-8 Stainless Steel, 1/8 NPT, 1/8" High

Material

18-8 Stainless Steel

Pipe Size

1/8

Thread Type

NPT

Thread Fit

Class 2B

Thread Direction

Right Hand

Width

5/8"

Height

1/8"

Drive Style

External Hex

Nut Type

Panel

Panel Nut Shape

Hex

Hex Nut Profile

Thin

System of Measurement

Pipe

RoHS

Compliant

These panel nuts have good chemical resistance and may be mildly magnetic. They can be
fastened with a wrench for more torque while tightening than knurled panel nuts. Also
known as dress nuts, they are extremely thin for use in tight spaces such as electrical
panels.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#91862a306/=168blhz

Page 1 of 2

McMaster-Carr - Hex Panel Nut, 18-8 Stainless Steel, 1/8 NPT, 1/8" High

2/5/17, 8:35 PM

The information in this 3-D model is provided for reference only.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#91862a306/=168blhz

Page 2 of 2

McMaster-Carr - High-Strength Steel Hex Nut, Grade 8, Zinc Yellow-Chromate Plated, 5/16"-24 Thread Size

High-Strength Steel Hex Nut
Grade 8, Zinc Yellow-Chromate Plated, 5/16"-24 Thread Size

Material
Fastener Strength
Grade/Class

2/5/17, 9:41 PM

In stock
$5.29 per pack of 100
94895A810

Zinc Yellow-Chromate Plated Steel
Grade 8

Thread Size

5/16"-24

Thread Type

UNF

Thread Spacing

Fine

Thread Fit

Class 2B

Thread Direction

Right Hand

Width

1/2"

Height

17/64"

Drive Style

External Hex

Nut Type

Hex

Hex Nut Profile

Standard

System of Measurement

Inch

RoHS

Not Compliant

These nuts are about 25% stronger than medium-strength steel nuts.
Zinc yellow-chromate plated steel nuts resist corrosion in wet environments.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#94895a810/=168cfnw

Page 1 of 2

McMaster-Carr - High-Strength Steel Hex Nut, Grade 8, Zinc Yellow-Chromate Plated, 5/16"-24 Thread Size

2/5/17, 9:41 PM

The information in this 3-D model is provided for reference only.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#94895a810/=168cfnw

Page 2 of 2

McMaster-Carr - Low-Carbon Steel Rectangular Bar, 1/8" Thick, 1" Width

2/5/17, 8:41 PM

Low-Carbon Steel Rectangular Bar

8910K395

1/8" Thick, 1" Width

Grade

1018

Shape

Rectangular Bar

Finish

Unpolished

Thickness

1/8"

Thickness Tolerance

-0.006"

Width

1"

Width Tolerance

-0.006"

Yield Strength

54,000 psi

Hardness

Medium (Rockwell B70)

Specification Met

ASTM A108

Construction

Cold Drawn

Material Composition
Carbon

0.13-0.20%

Manganese

0.30-0.90%

Silicon

0.15-0.30%

Phosphorus

0.04% Max.

Sulfur

0.50% Max.

Iron

98.06-99.42%

Nominal Density

0.283 lbs./cu. in.

Electrical Resistivity

15.9 microhm-cm @ 32° F

Thermal Conductivity

29.4 Btu/sq. ft./ft./hr./°F @ 212° F

Coefficient of Thermal
Expansion (Text)

6.7-7.5 × 10-6

Elongation Range

10-36%

Length

1/2

RoHS

Compliant

ft., 1 ft., 2 ft., 3 ft., 6 ft.

One of the most widely used types of steel, low-carbon steel is weldable,
machinable, and can be surface hardened by heat treating. It is suitable
for a variety of applications, such as structural and power transmission
components.
Warning
Warning:: Physical, mechanical, and chemical properties
guaranteed and are intended only as a basis for comparison.

are

not

Material is 1018 carbon steel. Thickness and width tolerances are -0.006"
https://www.mcmaster.com/#8910k395/=168bo6p

Page 1 of 2

McMaster-Carr - Low-Carbon Steel Rectangular Bar, 1/8" Thick, 1" Width

2/5/17, 8:41 PM

for 1/8" to 4" wide bars; they are -0.010" for 4 1/2" to 6" wide bars; and they
are -0.013" for bars 7" and wider. Length tolerance is ±1/8" for 1/2-ft.
lengths, ±1" for 1-ft. lengths, ±2" for 2-ft. lengths, ±3" for 3-ft. lengths, and
±6" for 6-ft. lengths.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#8910k395/=168bo6p

Page 2 of 2

McMaster-Carr - Low-Pressure Brass Threaded Pipe Fitting, Tee Connector, 1/2 NPT Female

Low-Pressure Brass Threaded Pipe Fitting
Tee Connector, 1/2 NPT Female

For Use With

Air, Drinking Water, Natural Gas, Oil, Steam

Shape

Tee

Type

Connector

Connection Type

Pipe

Pipe Connection Type

Threaded

Connection

NPT Female

Pipe Size

1/2

Material

Brass

Maximum Pressure

200 psi @ 72° F

Maximum Steam Pressure

125 psi @ 400° F

2/5/17, 8:51 PM

In stock
$7.97 Each
4429K253

For Flange
Material

Brass

Class

150

For Pipe
Material

Brass

Schedule

40

Class

125

Specifications Met

ANSI/ASME B1.20.1, ANSI/ASME B16.15, NSF/ANSI
Standard 61 for Drinking Water

RoHS

Compliant

Designed for use in low-pressure applications, these fittings are also known as Class
125 fittings. They are brass for good corrosion resistance.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#4429k253/=168bso5

Page 1 of 2

McMaster-Carr - Low-Pressure Brass Threaded Pipe Fitting, Tee Connector, 1/2 NPT Female

2/5/17, 8:51 PM

The information in this 3-D model is provided for reference only.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#4429k253/=168bso5

Page 2 of 2

McMaster-Carr - Masterkleer PVC Clear Tubing, 1/2" ID, 5/8" OD

2/5/17, 8:20 PM

Masterkleer PVC Clear Tubing

In stock
$10.50 Each
5233K66

1/2" ID, 5/8" OD

For Use With

Air, Water

Hardness Rating

Soft

Hardness

Durometer 65A

Clarity

Clear

Material

PVC Plastic

ID

1/2"

OD

5/8"

Wall Thickness

1/16"

Flexibility

Very Flexible

Bend Radius

2 3/4"

Temperature Range

-40° to 160° F

Maximum Pressure

20 psi @ 72° F

Maximum Vacuum

Not Rated

Compatible Tube Fittings

Barbed

For Use With Metering Pumps

No

Sterilize With

Gas, Steam
(Autoclaving)

Color

Clear

Length

25 ft.

RoHS

Compliant

This general purpose PVC tubing is an economical choice for air and
water applications. Tubing is clear, so you can easily monitor flow.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#5233k66/=168bdp0

Page 1 of 1

McMaster-Carr - Nylon Cable Tie, 5-1/2" Long, 1" Bundle Diameter, 40 lb. Break Strength, Black

Nylon Cable Tie
5-1/2" Long, 1" Bundle Diameter, 40 lb. Break Strength, Black

Cable Tie Style

Standard

Overall Length

5 1/2"

For Maximum Bundle
Diameter

2/5/17, 8:38 PM

In stock
1-9 Packs $4.80
10 or more $3.93
7130K53

1"

Breaking Strength

40 lbs.

Reusable

No

Width

0.14"

Thickness

0.05"

Material

Nylon

Closure Type

Lock

Body Style

Solid

For Use Outdoors

No

Specifications Met

MS 3367-5, UL 62275, UL 94V2

Temperature Range

32° to 180° F

Color

Black

RoHS

Compliant

Bundle and secure your cable, wire, and hose. Also known as zip ties.
Standard ties balance flexibility and strength, making them good for most bundling
applications.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#7130k53/=168bmxq

Page 1 of 1

McMaster-Carr - Odor-Removing Filter Felt Sheet, 10" x 10", 265 Grams/Square Meter Density

Odor-Removing Filter Felt Sheet

2/5/17, 8:38 PM

In stock
$7.35 Each
8997T61

10" x 10", 265 Grams/Square Meter Density

Thickness

0.1875"

Additional Specifications

10" × 10"

Less messy than carbon granules, this carbon-impregnated felt removes
odor from liquids and air. It’s good for use with Fill-Your-Own Filter
Cartridges. Maximum temperature is 150° F.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#8997t61/=168bmhn

Page 1 of 1

McMaster-Carr - Standard-Wall Brass Pipe Nipple, Fully Threaded, 1/2 Pipe Size

Standard-Wall Brass Pipe Nipple

2/5/17, 9:54 PM

In stock
$2.29 Each
4568K171

Fully Threaded, 1/2 Pipe Size

For Use With

Air, Drinking Water, Natural Gas, Oil, Steam

Shape

Straight

Type

Pipe

Schedule

40

Threading

Fully Threaded

Connection Type

Pipe

Pipe Connection Type

Threaded

Gender

Male

Pipe Size

1/2

Length

1 1/8"

Thread Type

NPT

Material

Brass

Construction

Seamless

For Fitting
Material

Brass

Class

125

For Flange
Material

Brass

Class

150

Specifications Met

ASTM B687, NSF/ANSI Standard 61 for Drinking Water

RoHS

Compliant

Also known as Schedule 40 pipe, this is a common choice for low-pressure applications. It
is seamless, which provides a smooth interior for unrestricted flow. Pipe is brass for good
corrosion resistance.
Fully threaded pipe is also known as a close nipple; it is threaded on each end to the
center.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#4568k171/=168cm2k

Page 1 of 2

McMaster-Carr - Standard-Wall Brass Pipe Nipple, Fully Threaded, 1/2 Pipe Size

2/5/17, 9:54 PM

The information in this 3-D model is provided for reference only.

https://www.mcmaster.com/#4568k171/=168cm2k

Page 2 of 2

Shurflo 2088-594-154, 2088 Series, 198 GPH, 115 VAC Diaphragm Industrial Pump - Power Water Pumps - AmazonSmile

2/6/17, 5:56 PM

Kitchen & Bath Fixtur…
Supporting: Navy SEAL Foundation
Browsing History
Paul's Amazon.com

Departments
Kitchen & Bath Fixtures

All Home Improvement

Best Sellers

Hello, Paul

Today's Deals

Kitchen Fixtures

Account & Lists

Bathroom Fixtures

Water Filtration

Orders

0

Prime

Rough Plumbing

Cart

Power & Hand Tools

Tools & Home Improvement › Rough Plumbing › Water Pumps, Parts & Accessories › Power Water Pumps

SHURFLO

Sub
mit

Share

Shurflo 2088-594-154, 2088 Series,
198 GPH, 115 VAC Diaphragm
Industrial Pump
357 customer reviews
| 189 answered questions
Price:

$78.99

50+ Shares
Qty:

Include 4-Year Protection for
$12.46
Include 3-Year Protection for
$7.83

Get $50.00 off instantly: Pay $28.99 upon approval for the
Amazon.com Rewards Visa Card. Learn more

In Stock.
Want it Wednesday, Feb. 8? Order within 19 hrs 48 mins
and choose One-Day Shipping at checkout. Details
Sold by The Pump Force and Fulfilled by Amazon. Gift-wrap
available.

Click to open expanded view

Eligible for

donation.

N/A
Imported
self-priming up to 9 vertical lift feet
used in delivery and transfer of liquid applications up to 3
GPM (11.4LPM)
1/2" MPT, 115VAC 60Hz, non-corded 3 wires, built-in
check valve prevents back flow of fluid
built-in pressure switch, turn on/off at 45psi, adjustable
pressure setting
Santoprene valves and diaphragm

› See more product details
New (20) from $78.99
Report incorrect product information.

1

Add
to to
Cart
Add
Cart

Turn on 1-Click ordering for this browser

Ship to:
Paul Brenneman- San Luis Obisp 93401
Add to List
Add to your Dash Buttons

Other Sellers on Amazon

$78.99

Add to Cart

Sold by: Ernest F Mariani Company

$82.90

Add to Cart

Sold by: Amazon.com
New (20) from $78.99

Frequently Bought Together
Have one to sell?

Sell on Amazon

Total price: $125.03
Add allSubmit
three to Cart

+

+

Add all
three to List
Submit

These items are shipped from and sold by different sellers. Show details

This item: Shurflo 2088-594-154, 2088 Series, 198 GPH, 115 VAC Diaphragm Industrial Pump $78.99
SHURFLO (255-213) 1/2" Twist-On Pipe Strainer $5.00
SHURflo 182-200 Pre-Pressurized Accumulator Tank $41.04

https://smile.amazon.com/Shurflo-2088-594-154-2088-Diaphragm-I…=p_n_feature_keywords_browse-bin%3A2798323011%2Cp_89%3ASHURFLO

Page 1 of 8

Shurflo 2088-594-154, 2088 Series, 198 GPH, 115 VAC Diaphragm Industrial Pump - Power Water Pumps - AmazonSmile

Customers Who Bought This Item Also Bought

SHURFLO (255-213) 1/2"
Twist-On Pipe Strainer

SHURflo 182-200 PrePressurized Accumulator
Tank

435

Page 1 of 28

SHURflo 234-2926 1/2"
FPT X 1/2" Barb Straight
Swivel

239

$5.00

2/6/17, 5:56 PM

28

$41.04

$5.83

Sponsored Products Related To This Item (What's this?)

Homdox 1.6HP Booster
Pump Stainless Shallow
Well Pump Lawn
Sprinkling Pump for…
9

Aquatec (5853-1E12J574) Delivery Pump; 0.9
GPM; 130/60 PSI; 3/8"
JG; 120V With Cord
$116.98

Page 1 of 10

Aquatec 5513-1E12-J526
Pump 4.9 gpm 1/2 FPT
115VAC
2

[Update]Favson
Diaphragm Pump DC
12V Fresh Water Pump
4.0 L/min 100 PSI Self…

Seaflo 12V 100PSI Selfpriming Diaphragm Pump
5
$39.99

27

$170.82

$88.99

$25.12
Ad feedback

Special Offers and Product Promotions
Your cost could be $8.99 instead of $78.99! Get a $70 Amazon.com Gift Card instantly upon approval for the Amazon Prime
Rewards Visa Card Apply now

Product Description
This SHURflo Industrial on-demand positive displacement, 3 chamber diaphragm pump has a permanent magnet, thermally protected 115V AC motor that delivers
reliable performance in high-flow, moderate pressure applications. Self-priming up to 9 ft. vertical. Max. 50 PSI; max. 30 PSI inlet pressure. Discharge Port (in.): 1/2,
Self-Priming: Yes, Thermal Overload Protection: Yes, Suction Port (in.): 1/2, Max. Total Head (ft.): 100, Flow (GPH): 198, Max. PSI: 50, Volts: 115

Product Information

Technical Details

Additional Information

Part Number

52067

ASIN

Item Weight

5 pounds

Customer Reviews

Product Dimensions

8 x 4 x 4 inches

Item model number

2088-594-154

Size

1

B0001FAA5Y
357 customer
reviews
4.4 out of 5 stars

Best Sellers Rank

#2,584 in Home Improvements
(See top 100)

https://smile.amazon.com/Shurflo-2088-594-154-2088-Diaphragm-I…=p_n_feature_keywords_browse-bin%3A2798323011%2Cp_89%3ASHURFLO

Page 2 of 8

Shurflo 2088-594-154, 2088 Series, 198 GPH, 115 VAC Diaphragm Industrial Pump - Power Water Pumps - AmazonSmile

Color

Silver

Material

metal, aluminum

Power Source

ac

Voltage

115 volts

Wattage

104 watts

Amperage Capacity

0.9 A

Item Package Quantity

1

Flow Rate

3.3 GPM

Batteries Included?

No

Batteries Required?

No

2/6/17, 5:56 PM

#4 in Home Improvement > Rough
Plumbing > Water Pumps, Parts &
Accessories > Power Water Pumps
Shipping Weight

5.2 pounds (View shipping rates
and policies)

Domestic Shipping

Currently, item can be shipped only
within the U.S. and to APO/FPO
addresses. For APO/FPO
shipments, please check with the
manufacturer regarding warranty
and support issues.

International Shipping

This item can be shipped to select
countries outside of the U.S. Learn
More

Date First Available

July 8, 2007

Warranty & Support
Product Warranty: For warranty information about this product, please click here.
[PDF ]

Feedback
If you are a seller for this product, would you like to suggest updates through
seller support?
Would you like to tell us about a lower price?

Sponsored Products Related To This Item (What's this?)

Whirlpool Commercial
Water Cooler, Ice Chilled
Water, White Water
Dispenser

Homdox 1.6HP Booster
Pump Stainless Shallow
Well Pump Lawn
Sprinkling Pump for…

120
$119.00

Eteyo
Caravan/rv/boat/marine
Water Diaphragm Pump
20l/min 5.5gpm 60psi…

9
$88.99

Page 1 of 22

Uniclife UL160
Submersible Water
Pump, 160 GPH 1.2M
Aquarium/ Hydroponic…

5
$109.99

Homdox 1HP 3566 GPH
Submersible Clean/Dirty
Water Pump Sump Pump
for Garden Punp

519
$11.36

7
$52.99
Ad feedback

Customers Viewing This Page May Be Interested In These Sponsored Links (What's this?)

https://smile.amazon.com/Shurflo-2088-594-154-2088-Diaphragm-I…=p_n_feature_keywords_browse-bin%3A2798323011%2Cp_89%3ASHURFLO

Page 3 of 8

Appendix M: User’s Manual

Grey Water Capture
Operation Manual
_____________________________________________________________________

Warnings
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Sitting under the tank can lead to serious injury or death
Do not push or tip over the tank
Avoid getting water on the pump
Do not drink grey water
Avoid tripping over the tubes

Device Installation
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

Connect the pump power cable to the float valve power plug
Construct stand by using the provided screws to affix the four legs to the rectangular base
Position the stand so it is over the toilet and as close to the wall as possible
Place tank on top of stand
Bolt the tank to the stand to ensure rigidity
Turn off the valve on the fresh water line and disconnect the main water line from the toilet
Connect the outlet of the T-Flange to the toilet water inlet
Connect the main water line to one end of the T-Flange
Connect the barbed fitting assembly to the other end of the T-Flange
Measure the length of PVC tube needed to go from the T-Flange to the tank outlet
Cut the PVC tube to length based on the users bathroom layout
Connect the tank to the toilet with the tube
Install a barbed fitting into the toilet's inlet hole
Measure/Cut length needed for PVC tube to go from tank to pump
Install a barbed hose fitting on both sides of the pump
Connect the tank to the pump with PVC tube
Measure/Cut length needed for PVC tube to go from pump to shower
Connect suction cup to end of PVC tube using zip ties
Connect filter to end of PVC tube (before suction cup)
Using the suction cup, attach the end of the tube to the shower floor
Connect pump power cable to float switch piggy back plug
Connect float switch piggy back plug to wall to turn the pump on before each shower
Unplug the pump from the wall after each shower

Pre-Operation Inspection
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Check system for leaks
Check tank for cracks, dents or other damage.
Check all electrical components and ensure that wiring is correct.
Check if there is any damage to insulation
Be sure that all structural and critical components are present and associated fasteners are in
place and correctly tightened

Operations
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Plug pump into wall outlet, pump will turn on
Turn on shower, take shower
Pump will deliver water to tank until tank is full, than automatically shut off
Unplug pump after getting out of the shower
Use toilet as normal throughout the day and the system will supply water until tank is empty

Troubleshooting
Why isn't the tank filling with water?
a. Check tank to see if it already has water in it. If tank is full, the float valve will prevent
the pump from turning on.
b. Ensure pump is on while taking a shower
c. Ensure suction cup is stuck to the floor of the shower, and the inlet tube is attached to
suction cup
d. Ensure inlet tube is not obstructed, check the filter for excessive debris
e. Check tubes for kinks or blockages
f. Check tube connections to ensure nothing has been disconnected
Why does the toilet not flush?
a. Check the tank to see if there is water in it. If there is no water in the tank but there
should be, see the "why isn't the tank filling with water?" section
b. Check the toilet valve by opening the fresh water valve and supplying fresh water to the
toilet. If the toilet still does not flush than the problem is with your toilet – most likely
the valve system.

Maintenance
1. Clean the tank at suggested frequency (every 3 months)
2. Replace the filter at suggested frequency (every 3 months)
3. Replace any damaged component (dependent on system wear)

