DRIP HYDRAULICS PROGRAM

by

Garret Blocher

BioResource and Agricultural Engineering
BioResource and Agricultural Engineering Department
California Polytechnic State University
San Luis Obispo
2014

TITLE

:

Drip Hydraulics Program

AUTHOR

:

Garret Blocher

DATE SUBMITTED

:

April 1, 2015

Daniel J. Howes
Senior Project Advisor

Signature

Date

C. Arthur MacCarley
Department Head

Signature

Date

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

First and foremost, I would like to thank my senior project advisor, Dr. Howes, for all of
his help and understanding throughout this process. He has been my mentor during the
most arduous years of my life pushing me to achieve great things in the field of water.
Secondly, I would like to thank Dr. Burt to whom I owe thanks for paving the way down
this long path on which I have embarked.

iii

ABSTRACT
This senior project report lays out the production of drip hydraulics software composed in
Microsoft Excel and backed by coding in Visual Basic for Applications. The program
performs 2 main functions useful in the design of irrigation systems. The first is based on
performing single hose computations under three different circumstances. It can solve for
the average emitter flow rate given the hose inlet pressure, the inlet pressure given the
average emitter flow rate, and can model hose pressures and flow rates while flushing.
The second function is to place a manifold in the hydraulically optimum location on a
slope. One advantage of this software over its former DOS version is the designer has
access to all of the data used in the calculations including the entire Bernoulli tables that
model flows and pressures at every emitter in the field. As this could also be a point of
weakness, great effort was put into making the software simple to follow and displaying
pertinent information in intuitive locations.
Throughout the creation of this program, results were compared against the original to
ensure it yielded similar answers. However, since the two use drastically different ways
to narrow in on a solution, it is impossible to match results exactly. Regardless, various
trial inputs and results were recorded using both platforms. These can be seen in
Appendix C. All things considered, this project still came within 1% of the results of the
original on 84% of the computations and within 10% on 97% of the computations.

iv

DISCLAIMER STATEMENT

The university makes it clear that the information forwarded herewith is a project
resulting from a class assignment and has been graded and accepted only as a fulfillment
of a course requirement. Acceptance by the university does not imply technical accuracy
or reliability. Any use of the information in this report is made by the user(s) at his/her
own risk, which may include catastrophic failure of the device or infringement of patent
or copyright laws.
Therefore, the recipient and/or user of the information contained in this report agrees to
indemnify, defend and save harmless the State its officers, agents and employees from
any and all claims and losses accruing or resulting to any person, firm, or corporation
who may be injured or damaged as a result of the use of this report.

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS

SIGNATURE PAGE
ACKNOWLEGEMENTS
ABSTRACT
DISCLAIMER STATEMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF FIGURES
LIST OF TABLES
INTRODUCTION
LITERATURE REVIEW
Distribution Uniformity
Friction Loss
Design of Lateral
Manifold Placement
Flushing
Computer Programming Options
PROCEDURES AND METHODS
Program Planning
Program Construction
Program Description
Input
Output
RESULTS
Program Testing
Comparing Results
DISCUSSION
Code Organization
Logic Structure
Error Handling
Obsolescence
RECOMMENDATIONS
REFERENCES
APPENDICES
Appendix A: How Project meets requirements for the BRAE Major
Appendix B: Bernoulli Table
Appendix C: Results Comparison Data

vi

ii
iii
iv
v
vi
vii
viii
1
2
2
4
5
11
14
14
15
15
15
16
16
17
21
21
21
22
22
22
23
23
24
26
28
28
31
33

LIST OF FIGURES

Page
1.

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

Moody Diagram. This relates the Darcy-Weisbach friction factor (f), Reynolds
number (Re) and relative roughness for flow in a circular pipe (Burt and Styles
1
2011).
Lateral, riser, sprinkler assembly with marked points of interest (Hathoot et al.
1994)
1
Flow path due to online drip emitter (a) and inline drip emitter (b)
(Provenzano and Pumo 2004)
1
Comparison of pressure variation along uphill and downhill manifold sections (Burt
1
and Styles 2011)
Input sheet shown with example data
1
Overall layout of Computations sheet
1
Pressure Distribution Chart on Computations sheet
1
Results section on Computations sheet
1
Distribution Uniformity section on Computations sheet
1

LIST OF TABLES
vii

5
7
9
12
16
18
19
19
20

Page
1.

Examples of components that affect uniformity (Burt et al. 1997)

1

5

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

“F” factor for multiple outlets
1
“Z” factor for a given elevation/friction ratio
1
Color designations for Figure 6 above
1
Trial input values used in programming testing and debugging……………..
Percent of computed results that fall within various percent differences…….

7
9
12
30
31

viii

1

INTRODUCTION

An efficient irrigation system has many important factors to consider that all apply to
maintaining a high distribution uniformity (DU). This idea involves ensuring that all the
plants in the field receive similar volumes of water over a given period thus decreasing
the amount of discrepancy between the water received by two different areas in the field.
With a large gap between the highest and lowest amounts of water distributed, the
irrigator has to make a decision on how much water to apply such that the plants in the
areas getting little water are still satisfied with over-application and deep percolation in
other areas in the field. So, how does this affect you?
Everyone depends on food. With California experiencing a drought, it is vital to conserve
water at every corner especially in an industry that consumes a large portion of our water
resources — agriculture. People worldwide rely on engineers to make sound design
decisions that make possible use of water on crops that result in the highest yield in the
field. However, designing the best irrigation system possible relies on several iterations
and monotonous computations that engineers just do not have time to do in this fastpaced time in agriculture. Coupled with human input comes human error and without the
use of software to aid in these computations, mistakes can be made.
This is where software can assist. Software essentially takes inputs from the user and runs
all the necessary calculations behind the scenes to generate outputs. If designed correctly,
this can significantly reduce the workload of the users giving them the power to finish
multiple projects in the time that was formerly taken to complete just one.
The objective of this project is to create software that will help make irrigation system
design decisions with respect to where to place the manifold as well as output desired
values based on user input. The project will rely heavily on Microsoft Visual Basic coded
into a user-friendly Excel spreadsheet. It will utilize several theoretical calculations
regarding friction characteristics as well as rules developed by Dr. Charles Burt,
chairman of the Irrigation Training and Research Center at Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo.
This software update from DOS to a more recent language is essential due to the
limitations associated with the former. The current platform allows the user to change
only one variable at a time as well as limits the user to very slow navigation. Most
students that come into the department struggle to download and run the necessary
applications to use the archaic language while some don’t even know what DOS is. With
the proposed software, these issues will no longer be an issue. The Microsoft-based
software will give the user the ability to easily navigate through several different design
computations while allowing them to use a more up-to-date platform.

2

LITERATURE REVIEW

Distribution Uniformity
Distribution uniformity (DU) is a value used as a performance index for a singular field
(Burt and Styles 2011). Distribution uniformity (DU) has many components that
contribute to the overall non-uniformity of a system which include: pressure differences,
uneven spacing, unequal drainage, or “other” which takes into account unavoidable
irrigation system issues such as clogging or wear (Burt 2004). But before DU is expanded
upon, the idea of “low quarter” must first be explained. The low quarter depth, dlq, is
equal to the volume accumulated in ¼ total area of elements with the smallest depth
divided by ¼ of the total area of elements. This simply means the average depths
accumulated in the area of the field that receives the least amount of water (Burt et al.
1997). This value plays a vital role in the computation of DUlq as shown in equation 2
with which a grower or designer can use to gain an understanding of how well the
irrigation system is distributing the water. But, before this term can be expressed, one
must understand the dlq. This is defined as the average depths of water that is
accumulated over the quarter of the field receiving the smallest depths and is expressed in
equation 1.


1
. 	

.  4 	 		    	 

1
  	 		  
4

 
where:




(1)

(2)

davg = Average depth applied

Even though this value is an indicator of the uniformity of distributed water, it does not
signify whether the water applied is being beneficially used. This is a term referred to as
irrigation efficiency (Burt et al. 1997). A field can have a high distribution uniformity
while over-applying water such that it is lost to deep percolation which results in a poor
irrigation efficiency.
The best way to ensure that an irrigation system is designed with the highest DU possible
is to consider all aspects of the transportation of the water from the water source to the
crop with the most important factor being friction loss between the these points. Table 1
shows various issues resulting in a lowered DU as well as what causes them. For
sprinkler systems, these uniformity components include flow rate differences between
sprinklers, catch can non-uniformity, unequal application while system is starting up and
shutting down, and effects crops on the field edge experience. Drip and microspray
systems experience similar uniformity issues including differences in discharge been

3
emitters, variations in emitters due to manufacturing, plugging, and non-proportional
volume application to a given plant area (Burt et al. 1997). One of the largest contributors
to these issues are variations in pressure along laterals and manifolds which result in
discrepancies in emitter out flow and lateral inflows, respectively. This occurs because as
water travels down either of these system components, a portion of it exits along the
length. This causes differing flow rates in the sections of pipe between points of exit and,
as consequence, differing head loses in these sections. How this is accounted for when
designing an irrigation system is through the use of a “Bernoulli Table” on a spreadsheet
whose purpose is to model the various pressure differences along either a lateral or
manifold while taking all the aforementioned variables into account. An example of this
can be seen in Appendix B. The proposed software will utilize this technique to acquire
the distribution uniformity along individual laterals (DUhose) and DU for manifolds.
Table 1. Examples of components that affect uniformity (Burt et al. 1997)
Uniformity component
Factors causing nonuniformlty
(a) Components and factors of DU for hand-move sprinkler irrigation systems
Pressure differences
Flow rate differences between
sprinklers
Different nozzle sizes
Nozzle wear
Nozzle plugging
Sprinkler pattern nonuniformity
Spacing
Sprinkler design
Nozzle size and pressure
Wind
Vertical orientation
Plant interference around sprinkler
Unequal application during start-up and Pipe diameter and length
shutdown
Duration of set
Edge effects
Inadequate overlap on field edges
(b) Components and factors of DU for drip/microirrigation systems
Differences in discharge between
Pressure differences
emitters
Plugging of emitters
Manufacturing variation
Soil differences, if the emitters are
buried
Different emitter types in the same
field
Temperature differences along a lateral
Volumes applied not proportional to
plant area (assuming same plant age)

Variations in plant spacing are not
matched by emitter spacing or
scheduling

4
Unequal discharge
Friction Loss
As water travels through a pipe, it loses energy due to friction. This results in a lowering
pressure along the length of the pipe or hose. This is a key element to the design of an
irrigation system in regards to hose lengths, manifold placement, and overall layout of a
system. Several equations have been generated to estimate losses due to friction,
however, the Darcy-Weisbach equation has shown to be the most accurate and reliable
(von Bernuth 1990). This equation is shown below:
  !
where:

"# $
'
2&
V=
L=
D=
g=
f=

(3)
Water velocity (ft/sec)
Pipe length (ft)
Inside diameter (ft)
Acceleration due to gravity (ft/sec2)
A friction factor dependent on Reynolds Number (Re)

In order to find the correct friction factor (f) for the Darcy-Weisbach equation knowing
the relative roughness and Reynolds Number, one must refer to the Moody Diagram
which can be seen in figure 1. If the flow of water is considered laminar, that is, having a
uniform velocity profile and an Re < 2,000, then one would use equation 4. Or, more
commonly for this application, if one is determining the friction factor for a small
diameter pipe, this factor varies according to equation 5 which is also known as the
Blasius equation (Provenzano and Pumo 2004; Demir 2007).
  64)* +,

  0.302 )* +/.$0

(4)

(Re < 2,000)
(2,000≤ Re ≤100,000)

(5)

Even though the Blasius equation is quite often used in hand calculations, the most
common for computer applications is the Fanning equation, shown as equation 6, because
of its wider range of allowable Reynolds numbers (Burt and Styles 2011).
  0.0056 2 0.5 )* +/.3$

(2,000≤ Re ≤1,000,000)

(6)

The Reynolds Number (Re) is a dimensionless value defined as:
#

where:
V = Water velocity (ft/sec)
D = Inside diameter (ft)
2
v = Kinematic viscosity of water (ft /sec)
)* 

(7)

5

Figure 1. Moody Diagram. This relates the Darcy-Weisbach friction factor (f), Reynolds
number (Re) and relative roughness for flow in a circular pipe (Burt and Styles 2011).
Design of a Lateral
A lateral is the smallest diameter pipe in the field onto which emitters (sprinklers,
microsprayer, inline/online emitters, etc.) are attached (Phocaides 2007). To design an
irrigation system properly, one must assess the total head loss throughout the lateral
including friction loss along the pipe, local losses from emitters, and minor losses due to
fittings and connectors (Provenzano 2005). In a drip hose/tape system, the lateral is
usually composed of a polyethylene and is extruded in various thicknesses depending on
the application. In a sprinkler irrigation system, there are also two commonly used
options. One consists of 30 foot lateral sections of aluminum or PVC pipe that can be
moved by hand. In the second, a solid set system, laterals are buried PVC pipe with
sprinkler risers spaced at a predetermined interval. Since both drip and sprinkler systems
are still commonly used, the program to be created will be able to handle input for both
scenarios.
Emitter Types. Sprinklers are a very common irrigation device in almost all crop types.
They are designed with either a fixed or rotating head and utilize a small orifice through
which water is discharged.
Drip tape, the thinner of the two polyethylene pipe options, utilizes emitters that are
integrated in the tape and use a turbulent path to increase velocity past the emitter such
that any suspended solids in the water are carried through the path and beyond the emitter
hole. While reducing clogs, this induces a local loss at the emitter that, by itself, is

6
negligible. However, this loss has gained interest in the development of drip hydraulic
modeling software over the last few years. It has been shown to have a considerable
contribution to the overall head loss when there are a large number of these instances
along the length of a lateral which, in most cases, there are (Gyasi-Agyei 2013). These
drip tape emitters come in two forms. The first is a welded-on emitter that can be inserted
into the hose as the polyethylene is extruded. The tape then acts as the outer shell of the
emitter and has holes along its length for flow discharge. Other tape emitters are part of
the tape which has paths spanning the entire run to keep the flow turbulent and solids
suspended. They are constructed with overlapping layers of polyethylene (Burt and Styles
2011).
Drip hose, a more stout alternative to drip tape, tends to support microsprayers and online drip emitters. Both of these emitters use a barb to stay attached to the drip hose,
however, this barb obstructs the flow path resulting in a local head loss as well. A
characteristic of on-line emitters is susceptibility to plugging. Unless the emitter has an
exceptional tortuous path, multiple flexible orifices, or a rather large orifice, this type of
emitter is sensitive to plugging (Burt and Styles 2011).
Discharge. Emitter discharge flow rate is proportional to the point pressure at the orifice
with respect to the emitter exponent and an empirically derived emitter constant. This is
characterized by equation 8 below (Burt and Styles 2011).
4  5 67

where:

(8)
Q=
k=
P=
x=

Emitter discharge (GPH)
Nozzle discharge coefficient
Pressure at nozzle (psi)
Emitter exponent

Sprinkler Discharge. Sprinkler discharge uses an emitter coefficient of 05 and can
simply be calculated based on the relation between pressure and flow rate shown in
equation 9 below (Hathoot et al. 1994).
4  5 6/.0
where:

(9)
Q = Emitter discharge (GPH)
k = Nozzle discharge coefficient
P = Pressure at nozzle (psi)

The nozzle discharge coefficient can be easily calculated given the manufacturers’
sprinkler data. However, a value not typically taken into account is the loss due to friction
in the sprinkler riser (Hathoot et al. 1994). Even though this may be a negligible value, it
can still alter the emitter discharge and therefore should be taken into account. The
following set of equations, 10 through 15, show a condensed progression of formulas
used by Hathoot et al. to calculate the exact (theoretical) discharge of a sprinkler with a
riser. The variables used relate to figure 2 which shows a lateral, riser, sprinkler
assembly.

7

Figure 2. Lateral, riser, sprinkler assembly with marked points of interest (Hathoot et al.
1994)
Equation 10 shows how Pu is related to Pk by taking into account the various losses
between the two points.
68  69 2 68: 2 6:9 2 ;
where:

Pu =
Pk =
Pur =
Prk =
hR =

(10)

Pressure at point u (psi)
Pressure at point k (psi)
Pressure loss from point u to point r (psi)
Pressure loss from point r to point k (psi)
Height of riser

One can note that equation 11 is simply a minor loss formula which multiplies a
coefficient specific to the junction by the corresponding velocity head. This head loss Pur
can only be calculated if the coefficient Kur is determined.

68:  <8: !
where:

48$
'
2&=$

Kur =
Qu =
g=
A=

(11)

A coefficient found using Gardel’s equation
Lateral discharge at point u (GPH)
acceleration due to gravity (ft/s2)
Cross-sectional area of lateral (ft2)

Several studies conducted by Gardel and Rechsteiner (1970) resulted in the development
of equation 12. This study involved the research and testing of various pipe connections

8
including a 90 degree tee connection which most closely represents the link between the
lateral and a sprinkler riser.
	
D0.4 @ 0.1 =E
A $
A $
<8:  0.95 ?1 @
B 2 ? B C@0.3 2
F
	 $
48
48
D E
=
where:
q = flow rate through riser (GPH)
Qu = Lateral discharge at point u (GPH)
a = Cross-sectional area of riser (ft2)
A = Cross-sectional area of lateral (ft2)

(12)

The result of combining equations 11 and 12 is shown in equation 13.
	
D0.4 @ 0.1 =E
48$
A $
A $
68: 
B 2 ? B C@0.3 2
G0.95 ?1 @
FH
	 $
2&=$
48
48
D=E

(13)

If the riser is long, equation 14, developed by Kincaid and Heerman (1970), can be
substituted with the Darcy-Weisbach equation. However, most cases do not use
particularly long risers so this equation will suffice.
6:9


48$
DJ.$ E
KL

I

2&=$

where:

Prk =
Qu =
g=
A=

(14)

Head loss through the riser (psi)
Lateral discharge at point u (GPH)
Acceleration due to gravity (ft/s2)
Cross-sectional area of lateral (ft2)

By substituting equations 13 and 14 into 10 while considering sprinkler i, one can replace
Pk with its respective sprinkler pressure, Pi resulting in equation 15 below.
	
D0.4 @ 0.1 E
4M$
AM $
AM $
=
AM  <N O6M @
G0.95 ?1 @ B 2 ? B C@0.3 2
F
	 $
2&=$
4M
4M
D=E
@

48$

2&=$

I

DJ.$


E
KL H @

; P

(15)

Using equation 15, the sprinkler discharge can be calculated.
Drip Emitter Discharge. Drip emitters bring about an entirely different set of concerns
than sprinklers. These include variations due to the manufacturing process, water
temperature effects, and clogging (Provenzano 2007). The biggest concern with
inconsistency in manufacturing, while usually maintaining a coefficient of variation (cv)
below 0.10, is a hose distribution uniformity (DUhose). Some refer to this as emission

9
uniformity (EU) but the concept is the same. The contribution cv lends to DUhose is
represented in equation 16 as defined by Karmeli and Keller (1975).
DUSTU*  ?1 @ 1.27
where:

DUhose
=
cv =
N=
Qmin =
Qavg =




√X

B!

4YMZ
'
4

(16)

Hose distribution uniformity
Coefficient of variation
Number of emitters per plant
Minimum flow rate along the lateral (GPM)
Average flow rate along the lateral (GPM)

Another factor one must consider with regard to drip emitters, both online and inline, is
local head loss due to either a barb or coextruded emitter that disrupts the streamline and
flow characteristics of the traveling water. The protrusion of the barb into the flow path
causes a contraction in the drip hose effectively reducing the cross-sectional area of the
lateral resulting in an increased head loss. Similarly, an inline emitter reduces the area in
the tape compared to a section just upstream of the emitter causing loss in head
(Provenzano and Pumo 2004).

Figure 3. Flow path due to online drip emitter (a) and inline drip emitter (b)
(Provenzano and Pumo 2004)
By introducing an emitter in a pipe, the lateral incurs head loss due to both contraction
and enlargement represented as λc and λs, respectively (Provenzano and Pumo 2004).
This is modeled in figure 3 above. Below are the equations Provenzano and Pumo (2004)
used in their study of flow characteristics past various drip emitters. Equation 17 was
developed by Bagarello et al. (1997) and shows that the coefficient of kinetic head is
independent of Reynolds number as it only relies on the ratio of the area of the pipe and
the reduced area due to a protruding emitter.

10
=M
	  1.68 ! @ 1'
=

,.$J

where:

(17)

a = Coefficient of kinetic head
Ai = Area of pipe section (in2)
Ag = Flow cross-section area (in2)

Equation 18 is the end result of a series of theoretical computations performed by
Provenzano and Pumo (2004).
\ 	 !
where:

#$
'
2&

(18)
λ=
a=
V=
g=

Head Loss due to contraction and enlargement
Coefficient of kinetic head
Mean flow velocity (ft/s)
Acceleration due to gravity (ft/s2)

Using this, one could develop a Bernoulli table as shown in Appendix B that not only
takes into account friction loss along the lateral, but local losses due to protruding
emitters as well. However, the concern with this is that, to adequately take this effect into
account in the proposed software, the dimensions of several emitters would have to be
determined and inputted to reduce the work of the user or future professors for the BRAE
414 class.
Effects of Temperature. It is typical to add about 2.5% of the total lateral length to the
total computation due to the fact that in changing temperatures, the polyethylene hoses
shrink and swell (Burt and Styles 2011). This concept should definitely be considered
when calculating the friction loss in a system as it plays a vital role in determining the
inlet pressure of the system. The coefficient of thermal expansion for a polyethylene hose
is 0.00012 ft/degrees F, however, this changes slightly from polymer to polymer. In a
study conducted by Clark (2005), several brands of drip tape were tested to see the effects
that an increase in water temperature and pressure would have on the discharge. The drip
tapes were tested with water temperatures ranging from 20 degrees C to 50 degrees C at
55, 69, and 83 kPa. To relate the tests to each other, the group used equation 19 below.
This ensured that each tape could be compared to the others as it involved determining a
“temperature flow rate index” number also referred to as temperature discharge ratio or
TDR (Clark 2005).
]) 
where:

A^ °
A$/ °

(19)

qt° = Emitter discharge at each measured temperature (GPH)
q20° = Emitter discharge at initial base temperature (GPH)

In this study, the highest TDR recorded was 1.97 with a water temperature of 50 degrees
C at 83 kPa. This means that the discharge of the emitter was almost twice as high as it

11
was when tested at initial conditions. Other tapes’ TDR values ranged from 0.94 to 1.12
which may lead one to believe that the case with a TDR of 1.97 was an outlier, however,
even a 12% increase in emitter discharge is substantial enough to cause concern
especially in a large field with tens of thousands of emitters. Water temperature doesn’t
typically play as significant a role in the design of an irrigation system as variations in
friction and elevation do, but is should be a point of concern especially in areas with high
temperatures.
Spaghetti Hose Losses. Microsprayers typically demand higher flow rates than standard
drip emitters (between 4 and 30 GPH for Bowsmith Fanjets) and thus incur large losses
in the couplers and tubing supplying them. It is not unusual to see losses of 2 – 6 psi
though the two components (Burt and Styles 2011) and this needs to be accounted for in
the overall design. The equations below (20 and 21) show how the losses through the
tubing and couplers, respectively, are determined:
  < !
where:

  < !
where:

4,.`0
'
 a.``

Hf =
K=
Q=
D=

4$
'
a

Hf =
K=
Q=
D=

(20)
Friction loss (psi/ft)
4.37 x10-7 for English units (4.82 for metric)
Flow rate (GPH)
Tubing ID (inches)

(21)
Friction loss (psi/ft)
4.37 x10-7 for English units (4.82 for metric)
Flow rate (GPH)
Tubing ID (inches)

Manifold Placement
The overall goal of an irrigation system is to have all the emitter pressures equal
throughout the field so that the distribution uniformity is high. However, this can be
difficult to do if the system is to be designed on a sloping field. In order to get relatively
similar pressures along all the emitters, a manifold which serves laterals in two directions
has to be placed uphill from the serviced area (Burt and Styles 2011). This decision is
based on the idea that as water travels down a lateral, it losses energy due to friction. But,
if the lateral runs downhill, this lost energy can be accounted for or even negated due to
the potential energy of the water being converted to kinetic energy and thus making up
the difference. So, if a manifold is placed higher up on the hill, there is a lower pressure
requirement needed to serve the most uphill emitter while the downhill lateral remains
mostly unaffected by the increased friction loss accompanied with increased length
because it is made up for with greater potential energy to begin with. This effect is
modeled in figure 4.

12

49.50
49.00

Pressure (psi)

48.50
48.00
Uphill

47.50

Downhill
47.00
46.50
46.00

-20

0

20

40

60

Flow Rate (GPH)

Figure 4. Comparison of pressure variation along uphill and downhill manifold sections
(Burt and Styles 2011)
The two conditions for ideal manifold placement are that both the average emitter
pressures as well as inlet pressures are equal on both the uphill and downhill sides. So, if
the downhill side has da higher pressure than the uphill side, move the manifold down the
hill. The same concept applies if the uphill side is greater. This is an iterative process in
which differing lengths of uphill and downhill hoses are tested in order to meet these
conditions. Keller and Bliesner (1990), however, developed a concept that can
significantly reduce the number of iterations. This process first involves determining the
number of outlets on the lateral. A correction factor, F, is then found using table 2 which
is multiplied by the mainline friction loss yielding the total lateral friction as shown in
equation 19. Then, by comparing that number to the slope of the field, the designer can
interpolate a Z factor from table 3 with which they can multiply by the overall lateral
length, as shown in equation 20, to get an idea of the distance uphill from the bottom the
field the manifold should be (Burt 2013).
]	 "		   b c]	 	  d

(22)

"
	  e f]	 "		 "&g

(23)

where:

where:

Hf = Friction Loss (ft, m)
F = Correction Factor

Z = Keller’s manifold placement factor

13
Table 2. “F” factor for multiple outlets
Number of
outlets on the
lateral
1
5
10
20
40
100
more than 100

Correction
Factor, F
1
0.457
0.402
0.38
0.364
0.356
0.351

Table 3. “Z” factor for a given elevation/friction ratio
Elevation/Friction

Z

0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4

0.5
0.56
0.6
0.65
0.69
0.72
0.75
0.78
0.81
0.83
0.85
0.87
0.89
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.99
0.99
1

14
This process can be used to get an idea of where to begin the iterations and rarely yields
the best answer on the first try. The proposed program could use this process to help
reduce its footprint and speed up computations.
Flushing
Flushing is an essential practice in irrigation system maintenance to ensure the longevity
of the investment. By not performing this task, the emitters could become plugged,
sediment could accumulate in pipes and hoses, and distribution uniformity could be
drastically reduced. Flushing is most easily performed through the implementation of
flush manifolds. With a manifold on the downstream ends of the hose runs, the tapes are
more likely to be flushed frequently, equalization of pressure can take place in the case of
crimped tape, and, in the case of a tape break, the opportunity of soil entry into tape is
diminished (Burt and Styles 2011). Some design considerations when it comes to these
manifolds include:
1. Pressure regulating valves need to have the ability to allow for higher flow rates
and downstream pressures during flushing
2. Drip tape must be thick enough to withstand higher pressures
3. Flush manifolds should not be tapered to allow for high flow rates through the
tapes and the manifolds themselves
4. Header manifolds should be designed to handle flows at flushing as opposed to
normal operation criteria
5. Pump must be oversized to accommodate flushing requirements.
Tape Inlet Pressure. The drip tape inlet pressure typically increases during flushing
periods due to increased friction in the tape (due to higher flows though the tape and the
emitters) as well as friction requirements for the flush manifold itself, elevation changes
along the manifold, and any minor losses than incur through the tape/manifold fittings,
valves, and flushouts.
Tape Inlet Flow Rate. With increased inlet pressures comes an increase in inlet flow
rate. Because, when the valves at the downstream ends of the drip tapes are opened, there
is an additional loss due to the friction characteristics of the flush manifolds, the tapes
have a downstream pressure during flushing. This downstream pressure has an effect on
the new inlet flow rate resulting in a flow that is proportional to the difference in the
upstream and downstream ends of the drip tape (Burt and Styles 2011).
Computer Programming Options
There are a plethora of computer languages available that have a wide array of
advantages and disadvantages with regard to optional functions, user friendliness, and
overall performance. For a robust program that will be easy for the users to operate and
navigate, it is decided to use Excel as the host for Visual Basic for applications. It is also
possible to use VB.NET code with Excel but because the proposed software is operating
through a host and not as a standalone program, it will be easier to code through Excel’s
integrated development environment (IDE).

15
PROCEDURES AND METHODS

Program Planning
Original Program Analysis. Because this project entails updating an existing program
from an out-of-date platform to more recent software, time has to be spent assessing and
critiquing the current version in search for a more efficient and user-friendly path to the
needed output. By analyzing the original program, one could find and fix flaws or bugs
for the update.
User Interface Layout. A program that is to be used by students and professionals for
years to come needs to be intuitive and easy to use. It is imperative to establish a program
structure with logical flow so the user will not get lost in pages of user forms and sheet
after sheet of useless data that will require sorting through. It is for this reason that the
new program will utilize Visual Basic coding that will generate only the desired outputs.
Flow Chart Generation. In order to create a program that gets to the final result in the
most efficient manner, the program designer must sketch several flow charts to visualize
the flow of data though the embedded code. This is the most important step as it dictates
whether the construction phase will take days or weeks.
Program Construction
Coding Standards. Like most engineering work, there are several common practices
and standards to adhere to. One of the most important standards include commenting
throughout the code so anyone that accesses it can understand the steps taken to perform
a task. In Visual Basic, comments can be offset using apostrophes (‘). By placing this
symbol at the beginning of a line, the creator is signifying that they want this marked line
to be neglected when the program runs through all the lines of code. Another practice is
to condense the code to the fewest lines possible while still performing the task at hand.
This ensures the software will have a small electronic footprint and is not taxing on the
system when performing routines.
Functions and Subroutines. Functions and subroutines differ in the fact that functions
return a result where the latter carries out a set of instructions. These are tested and
debugged throughout the programming process to ensure proper operation. It is even
more important to keep these two organized and working if several are interrelated and
dependent on one another.
Controls. Often times, excel workbooks that have several different options that the user
can select from. These options can be displayed, accessed and selected through easy-touse “controls” such as a list box, combo box, drop downs, and check boxes. The former
two are typically used in applications with a large array of data that would be
cumbersome in a simple drop down. Checkboxes are often the best option in cases
requiring only a few options or when multiple options need to be selected.

16
Program Description
The workbook created takes user input regarding key aspects of hose hydraulics and
generates a solution based on the user’s task at hand. There are 3 sub functions behind the
“Single Hose” computation selection each based on slightly different calculation
methods. These include solving for the average flow rate of the emitters given an inlet
pressure, solving for the inlet pressure given a desired average flow rate, and modeling
the hose during flushing. The user also has the option to select the “Manifold Placement”
computation and this will allow them to place a manifold in a field such that the manifold
is the correct distance uphill from the center to minimize energy losses in the system and
increasing distribution uniformity.
Input
When the user opens the spreadsheet, they are only given the choice to decide what type
of calculation they would like to perform—Single Hose or Manifold Placement. This
decision then changes key aspects of the spreadsheet to make navigation somewhat less
overwhelming. Once an option is selected, the spreadsheet will allow the user to input
more values about the irrigation system in question. Figure 5 below depicts the Input
worksheet with a few of the cells filled out and options selected.

Figure 5. Input sheet shown with example data
User Interface. One of the constraints with the former program was with the step by
step terminal based user interface. While the software is very powerful, users were
distracted by its outdated feel. With this in mind, this project was designed with
consideration to the user throughout the process. Knowing that this workbook would be
used by a wide variety of individuals, the user interface was created to be simple and
intuitive. More than anything, however, the program needs to be robust. The user needs
to have the option to run a calculation then, on a whim, change any value used by the
program without being interrupted by an error message. In order to do this, several things
need to be performed at once. Depending on which cell was changed, worksheet code
may hide or unhide rows with regard to the procedure the user is trying to carry out. By

17
limiting the cells the user is able to enter data into, several issues can be avoided from the
start. The program may also call functions to change other aspects of the workbook such
as the chart display, textbox labels, or text color. Some subroutines can also be called
with the use of buttons. For example, the button on the Computations worksheet runs
certain parts of its code depending on several cell values throughout the workbook. The
text on this button is also changed between “Match Flows”, “Match Pressures”, and
“Place Manifold” depending on user input. Another key aspect of the interface is the use
of drop down lists on the input sheet further limiting the user to follow designated paths
through the workbook.
Output
Main Functions. As can be seen in Figure 5 above, when “Single Hose” is chosen from
the drop down list, three check boxes appear which are used to determine which
calculations will be performed by the program. The first option is to solve for the average
flow rate of the emitters along an individual hose with emitters with a constant spacing
given the inlet pressure of the hose. How this function operates is by changing the point
pressure of the most downstream emitter until the user’s desired input pressure is
reached. The second option is to calculate the inlet pressure of an individual hose given
an average inlet pressure. This is performed by changing the pressure of the most
downstream emitter until the average flow rate is equal to the input desired flow rate. The
third and final single hose computation the program can perform is modeling the hose
pressures and emitter flow rates while being flushed. In this, the velocity is converted to a
flow rate and this is added to the flow rate at the most downstream emitter. The
calculations to follow use the same technique as the other two functions to generate a
table of flows versus pressures but now with an increased flow rate due to flushing
requirements.
If the user decides they would like to determine the hydraulically optimum location for
their manifold, they need only to select the “Manifold Placement” option from the
dropdown list on the input sheet and the spreadsheet updates all the formulas, text boxes,
and chart to allow the computation to take place. The main function driving this is
actually dependent on two tables based on the calculations performed in the function to
calculate the inlet pressure given the desired average flow rate. One table is dedicated to
only the downhill portion of the hose while the other is for the uphill. The program
changes the most downstream point pressure on both of the tables (represented as either
end of the total length of the hose) until the average flow rate of the hoses equal the
user’s desired average flow rate. It then compares the inlet pressures of the two sides of
the hose and if the uphill pressure is higher than the downhill, then the downhill length
can be increased to decrease the friction lost in the excessive length the uphill section has.
Data Portrayal. Once the user has filled in all of the required cells on the Input sheet,
they can then press the Computations button to navigate to the results from the data they
had entered. Once here, the user must click on the button on the far left of the screen
which will read either “Match Flows”, “Match Pressures”, or “Place Manifold” as

18
discussed above. The screenshot in Figure 6 shows the overall layout of the sheet with
subsequent Figures 7, 8, and 9 being more detailed looks at areas that display useful
output data for the user. Table 4 shows the color designations of each section with regard
to Figure 6.

Figure 6. Overall layout of Computations sheet

Table 4. Color designations for Figure 6 above
Color

Section
Key Values
Keller Values
Pressure Distribution Chart
Results
Distribution Uniformity
Downhill Bernoulli Table
Uphill Bernoulli Table

The Key Values section is exactly that. It displays values from the Input sheet as well as
values easily derived from input data all of which will be used in one or more
computations carried out by the spreadsheet. The Keller Values table is derived from
formulas based on the Keller “Z” method for placing a manifold. This method is not ideal
for use in software applications as it is not as accurate as the techniques used by this
program. However, it is still good to use as a check to ensure the program is operating as
it should. The Pressure Distribution Chart is a dynamic chart that displays the pressures
of all the emitters along the hose and changes its axes titles depending on user input. If a
“Single Hose” calculation were to be performed, the chart would only display the
pressure distribution for hose going one way from the manifold. Alternatively, if a
“Manifold Placement” calculation were performed, the chart would model the pressures
of the hoses on either side of the manifold. An example of this is shown in Figure 7 using

19
arbitrary data for a drip tape system. In this figure, the pressure along the y-axis is
modeled at all the emitters in on the hose. The emitter number is given on the x-axis.

Figure 7. Pressure Distribution Chart on Computations sheet
The Results section, shown in Figure 8, displays important values that reference the
Bernoulli tables’ dynamic ranges. These values are dependent on where the 0th emitter is
which is representative of the inlet to the hose. For example, the table extends down to
the maximum number of emitters possible with regard to total length and emitter spacing.
However, the table only generates emitter values on the emitters that are in the field. For
example, if the total length of the hose is 600 feet with a 12 inch emitter spacing, the
downhill length could be calculated to be 384 feet. There would be 385 emitters on the
downhill side and 216 emitters on the uphill. To take this farther, to solve for the average
emitter pressure on the downhill side, the dynamic range would have to adjust its height
to extend from the pressure of the most downstream emitter all the way to the inlet
represented as the 385th outlet. This range of pressure values are then averaged to yield
your answer.

Figure 8. Results section on Computations sheet

20

Figure 9. Distribution Uniformity section on Computations sheet
Figure 9 above, the Distribution Uniformity section, also uses dynamic ranges but in a
very different manner. Since the low quarter distribution uniformity takes into account
only a select few of the values in its calculation, all flow rate values had to be ranked
from greatest to smallest between two separate tables. A function then averages the
lowest 25% of these values and divides it by the average of all flowrates yielding DUlq.
Overall, the program uses a total of 10 dynamically named ranges to perform its in-depth
computations most of which are in the Downhill and Uphill Bernoulli Tables. These
tables are extremely similar except when it comes to the change in elevation column. The
elevation in the uphill is subtracted from the pressures instead of added to account for
energy loss due to increase in elevation.

21
RESULTS

Program Testing
Since there was already reliable software available to perform the same tasks as this
project, results were tested against it to see how much variance there was between the
platforms. In this, one input at a time was changed to extreme values on both the high and
low ends. This led to the discovery of various bugs in the program which were fixed and
retested. Table 5 below shows the input values used in the tests while Appendix C
displays the results
Table 5. Trial input values used in programming testing and debugging
Input Description
Hose ID
Total Hose Length
Slope of Hose
Water Temp Entering Hose
Extra Percentage of Hose Length for Expansion
Emitter Spacing
Manufacturing Coefficient (cv)
Number of emitters per plant
Nominal flow rate
Pressure of the above nominal flow rate
Emitter Discharge Exponent
Desired inlet pressure
Desired average flow rate
Pressure at downstream end during flushing

Initial
Value
0.875
500
0.2
70
2
12
0.03
1
0.27
5
0.5
5
0.27
7

Low
Value
0.5
10
-1
35
0
6
0
1
0.05
1
0
0
0.1
0.1

High
Value
1
1200
5
150
10
300
0.1
10
0.5
10
1
10
2
10

Comparing Results
All of the single hose computations performed very well when compared to the original
drip hydraulics software. Table 6 below shows, out of the 408 comparable computations,
what the percent error was between platforms. It can be seen that the newer program
performed very well considering different techniques were used in the computation of
results.
Issues. One of the issues witnessed with comparing the results this way was the lack of
precision. Because all of the results were given in values rounded up to the tenths place, it
became difficult to realistically stack one against the other. This is even more pronounced
when comparing values less than 1. In one case, a maximum pressure difference along a
hose that the original program calculated was 0.008 psi when a value of 0.0085 psi was
determined for the same output in the new program. A difference of 0.0005 psi can be

22
Table 6. Percent of computed results that fall within various percent differences
Percent Difference

Number of Values

Percent of total values

< 1%
< 10%
< 25%
< 50%

344
395
404
404

84%
97%
99%
99%

calculated from this which when divided by the 0.008 psi leads to a 6.8% error. It is
scenarios like this that made up the majority of the 16% missing from the “less than 1%
difference” row in Table 5. As for the 3% of values from “less than 10% difference” up,
an explanation can be seen in Appendix C next to these high values. In short, this
occurred due to script in the original to code skip processes like tolerance checking and
value correction. Another constraint to consider is the older software has a limit of
around two thousand outlets but with the new program, the user is only limited by the
time they want to spend waiting for calculations to take place. Because this project
generates the Bernoulli tables only to the number of emitters necessary, its usefulness is
endless.

23
DISCUSSION

Code Organization
In programming, syntax is the backbone of orders to be carried out by the processor and
it varies from language to language. This includes various looping strategies, If
statements, and variable declaration that can all be used in different ways to yield the
same result. However, some practices are not only more efficient and faster than others,
but easier to understand. Great lengths were went to in order to have the most efficient
code while maintaining a high level of clarity. In a program with as many variables as
this one has, it cannot be stressed enough the importance of having code that not only the
author can read, but others as well. As a coding standard, anyone with access to the
source code needs to be able to dissect various parts of the code and understand how it
functions. A technique used in this project to aid in understanding code is the use of
comments throughout. Key parts of functions and subroutines were described in plain
English so someone else can get an understanding of what the code is actually doing.
Logic Structure
A difficult task to overcome was determining the best way to direct the user through the
user interface. With the user having the ability to do 4 different calculations, subroutines
had to be made such that the functions they carry out are dependent on what path the user
wants to take. For example, the check boxes on the input sheet are just cells, not objects.
In the initial state, the text and border colors in these six cells are the same as the fill of
the cells they lie on (dark gray). Upon selecting “Single Hose”, these are made visible by
changing the text and border colors to another color (light gray). These then appear to be
normal checkboxes that the user can select to determine what task they would like to
perform. But, it doesn’t stop there. As the user clicks on the boxed cell, a
“Selection_Change” macro (code that fires when cells within a specified range are
selected) checks that status of the value within the clicked cell and if it contains not text,
then the code changes the value to “X”. While doing so, it also deletes any other X’s that
may be in one of the other two check boxes. This is an important step in the avoidance of
errors that may arise from having several checkboxes containing X’s as other macros that
perform tasks dependent this selection need to know which functions to run.
As for the main functions driving the Bernoulli tables and various other subroutines, the
majority of computations were performed using If statements. For example, if the
downhill length is equal to the total length, “No Uphill Section” is displayed throughout
the workbook. This is, of course, always displayed when the user is performing Single
Hose calculations, but also when the manifold placement function decides that the
optimum location for the manifold is on the top of the slope. The manifold placement
function also incorporates the use of a For loop. The logic behind it goes something as
follows. For X = 0 to the number of iterations the code defines, set the downhill length
equal to half of the total length plus X multiplies by 10% of the total length. This is
performed until the uphill inlet pressure is greater than or equal to the downhill inlet
pressure.

24
Error Handling
Several steps were taken to prevent the user from inputting data that will break the
functions used. On the input page alone, there are forty-two possible message boxes that
appear and warn the user if a value they entered is either too high or too low. These error
messages reference a hidden sheet named “Limits” in which upper and lower bounds are
set for all user input boxes. The values on this sheet are also related to the path the user is
on in their computations. For example, if the user states they are doing calculations for
drip tape, then the maximum nominal flow rate they can enter is two gallons per hour.
However, if the user decides to select drip hose, then this upper bound increases to
twenty gallons per hour.
Another error message that may occur is one that fires when the slope is too steep for the
“Solve average GPH given Inlet P” function. This only occurs when the slope is negative
indicating that water is being pumped uphill. In this situation, the most downstream point
pressure is set to zero and the Inlet pressure is checked. If the inlet pressure is greater
than the desired inlet pressure, then the desired inlet pressure cannot be achieved and the
message box appears.
Obsolescence
Technology is an ever-evolving and growing industry. As it was the goal of this project to
bring former software up to date, it will be the goal of another to outdo this one. An issue
faced during the creation of this program was with the use of ActiveX controls. With a
Windows update, all ActiveX controls in workbooks were rendered useless. To avoid this
issue altogether, the decision to use shapes instead of controls was made. There is less
one can do with shapes as opposed to controls, however, it seems to be the safest route to
go with regard to obsolescence.

25
RECOMMENDATIONS

For the sake of time, over anything else, several ideas for this project were not pursued.
These include the ability to select the emitter of choice as opposed to entering
manufacturer data manually, generating a summary table for key values, making all
formulas dependent upon user-defined constants, working in metric units, as well as
making the entire project an excel plugin so use with any workbook. Each one of these
would require numerous hours of coding and workbook manipulation to complete
without lending much in terms of overall user experience. However, time saved though
use of these additions could lead to improved design capability and greater efficiency in
the office. How these tasks would have been carried out is described below.
There are hundreds of emitter types, configurations, and orientations to be found in
industry literature. Short of releasing new lines or discontinuing old products, the data
associated with this key design criteria is relatively constant. One goal for a future release
of the project would be allowing the user to select the emitter they would like to use for
their design from an easy to use list box. The user would be asked if they know
specifically which emitter they would like to use and if the answer is “Yes”, then a list
box will be made visible containing an array of available emitters. Upon selection, the
project is populated with known values of nominal pressure, flow rates at this nominal
pressure, and the emitter exponent stored on an emitter database sheet. But, if the user is
unsure of the emitter type or the emitter is not in the database, data would be entered
manually like it currently is.
Another update from the original should generate a summary table so the user can have
the option to display vital information quickly and can even be given the option to export
this data to another workbook. As it is, the Computations sheet displays all of the
information used in the complex calculations performed by various macros. It is difficult
to find information useful to the user’s design as too many cells have to be sifted through.
If a summary table can be generated containing this data, the overall effectiveness of this
program will improve.
One area of improvement would be to relate the formulas to cells containing various
constants such as viscosity and acceleration due to gravity. This was attempted in early
version of the project but was later abandoned in an attempt to compare results with Dr.
Burt’s original drip hydraulics software. Now that the workbook is reasonably close to
producing the results of the BASIC-backed software, it would not be too difficult to
retool the formulas to refer to user-defined constants. This also expands the overall
usability of the project to industries designing relatively incompressible fluid conveyance
systems with different fluid densities such as the oil industry. This leads to the next
suggested upgrade that also increases the number of possible users and that is to give the
user the option to work in metric units.
With the option to work in metric units, the user is not confined to work with data
displayed with imperial units. This would, again, only increase the reach and worldwide
usability of the software. However, this would probably be the most daunting task among

26
those suggested. Not only would formulas have to be changed, but text next to input and
output cells would have to as well.
The last recommendation would be to make the entire workbook an excel plugin. As a
plugin, the designer could work in their own irrigation design spreadsheet and press a
button on the ribbon to generate this program within it. It would load the required sheets,
formatting, formulas, and source code so the designer doesn’t have to navigate to another
workbook in a separate window. This would be the ideal solution to reduce the footprint
of the project as it could be stored in the Excel directory itself and only called when
needed.
Other, smaller upgrades that are not so daunting include locking the Computations sheet
until all data is filled on Input sheet, running the code behind the variable button on the
Computations sheet upon opening the sheet, and warning the user that the Computations
sheet is not up to date if input data has been changed since last running the main
subroutine. Also, it would be useful if the chart’s x axis title changed from “Downhill” to
“Uphill” if a negative slope is entered under a single hose computation.

27
REFERENCES
Book
1. Burt, Charles M. "Hand Move Sprinklers." Irrigation Design Manual. San Luis
Obispo, Ca: ITRC, 2013. N. pag. Print.
2. Burt, Charles, and Stuart W. Styles. Drip and Micro Irrigation Design and
Management: For Trees, Vines, and Field Crops: Practice plus Theory. San Luis
Obispo, CA: Irrigation Training and Research Center, 2011. Print.
3. Keller, J. and R.D. Bliesner. 1990. Sprinkle and Tricle Irrigation. Van Nostrand
Reinhold. N.Y., N.Y.
4. Phocaides, Andreas. Handbook on Pressurized Irrigation Techniques. Rome: FAO,
2007. Print.
Technical report
1. Burt, Charles M. Surface Drip Tape Irrigation Systems as an Alternative to SDI for
Field and Row Crops. Tech. no. 06-002. San Luis Obispo, Ca: ITRC, 2006. Print.
Journal article
1. Bagarello V; Ferro V; Provenzano G; Pumo D (1997). Evaluating pressure losses in
drip irrigation lines. Journal of Irrigation and Drainage Engineering (ASCE),
123(1), 1–7
2. Burt, C. M., A. J. Clemmens, T. S. Strelkoff, K. H. Solomon, R. D. Bliesner, L. A.
Hardy, T. A. Howell, and D. E. Eisenhauer. "Irrigation Performance Measures:
Efficiency and Uniformity." Journal of Irrigation and Drainage
Engineering 123.6 (1997): 423-42. ASCE. Web.
3. Clark, G. A., F. R. Lamm, and D. H. Rogers. "Sensitivity Of Thin-Walled Drip Tape
Emitter Discharge To Water Temperature." Applied Engineering in
Agriculture 21.5 (2005): 855-63. Web.
4. Demir, V., H. Yurdem, and A. Degirmencioglu. "Development of Prediction Models
for Friction Losses in Drip Irrigation Laterals Equipped with Integrated In-line
and On-line Emitters Using Dimensional Analysis." Biosystems Engineering 96.4
(2007): 617-31. Web.
5. Gyasi-Agyei, Yeboah. "A Bayesian Approach for Identifying Drip Emitter Insertion
Head Loss Coefficients." Biosystems Engineering 116.1 (2013): 75-87. Web.
6. Gardel, A., and Rechsteiner, G. F. (1970). "Les pertes de charge dans les

28
branchements en te des conduites de section circulaire." Bulletin Technique de la
Suisse Romande, 96(25).
7. Hathoot, Helmi M., Hussein M. Abo-Ghobar, Ahmed I. Al-Amoud, and Fawzi S.
Mohammad. "Analysis and Design of Sprinkler Irrigation Laterals." Journal of
Irrigation and Drainage Engineering 120.3 (1994): 534-49. Web.
8. Keller, J., and Karmelli, D. (1974). "Trickle irrigation design parameters." Trans.
ASAE, 17(4), 678-684.
9. Kincaid, D. C., and Heermann, D. F. (1970). "Pressure distribution on a center pivot
sprinkler irrigation system." Trans. ASAE, 13(5), 556-588.
10. Provenzano, Giuseppe, and Domenico Pumo. "Experimental Analysis of Local
Pressure Losses for Microirrigation Laterals." Journal of Irrigation and Drainage
Engineering 130.4 (2004): 318-24. Web.
11. Provenzano, Giuseppe, Domenico Pumo, and Pietro Di Dio. "Simplified Procedure to
Evaluate Head Losses in Drip Irrigation Laterals." Journal of Irrigation and
Drainage Engineering 131.6 (2005): 525-32. Web.
12. Provenzano, Giuseppe, Pietro Di Dio, and Guillermo Palau Salvador. "New
Computational Fluid Dynamic Procedure to Estimate Friction and Local Losses in
Coextruded Drip Laterals." Journal of Irrigation and Drainage Engineering 133.6
(2007): 520-27. Web.
13. von Bernuth, R. D. (1990). "Simple and accurate friction loss equation for plastic
pipe." J. Irrig. and Drain. Engrg., ASCE, 116(2), 294-298.
14. ASCE. (1978). "Describing irrigation efficiency and unifonnity." J.lrrig. and Drain.
Engrg.• ASCE, 104(1), 35-41.

29

APPENDIX A
HOW PROJECT MEETS REQUIREMENTS FOR THE BRAE MAJOR

30
HOW PROJECT MEETS REQUIREMENTS FOR THE BRAE MAJOR

Major Design Experience
The BRAE senior project must incorporate a major design experience. Design is the
process of devising a system, component, or process to meet specific needs. The design
process typically includes fundamental elements as outlined below. This project
addresses these issues as follows.

Establishment of Objectives and Criteria. The objectives and criteria for this project
are established to meet the needs of irrigation designers and the expectations of the
Irrigation Training and Research Center. See Design Parameters and constraints below
for a more thorough discussion of objectives and criteria.
Synthesis and Analysis. This project incorporates fluid dynamic computations,
empirical values derived from ITRC research, and coding techniques to attain key values
used for irrigation design.
Construction, Testing and Evaluation. The software was developed using various flow
charts to yield the result the user is looking for. It was then tested for bugs and issues to
ensure proper operation every time. The results of the finished product were compared to
the original software for accuracy and precision.
Incorporation of Applicable Engineering Standards. The coding behind this project
follows coding conventions such that it is easy to follow for someone else who may have
to edit it for future updates.
Capstone Design Experience
The BRAE senior project is an engineering design project based on the knowledge and
skills acquired in earlier coursework (Major, Support and/or GE courses). This project
incorporates knowledge/ skills from these key courses.








BRAE 236 Principles of Irrigation
BRAE 312 Hydraulics
BRAE 414 Irrigation Engineering
BRAE 533 Irrigation Project Design
BRAE 438 Drip/Micro Irrigation
CSC 231 Programming for Engineering Students
CSC 234 C and Unix

Design Parameters and Constraints
This project addresses a significant number of the categories of constraints listed below.

31
Physical. The software should be small and require very little computer resources as
well as maintain an easy to navigate user interface.
Economic. This program will save time and money as it will speed up the design
process.
Environmental. Better irrigation designs created using this software can lead to more
efficient use of water and fertilizers decreasing the potential for ground water
contamination.
Sustainability. This program can help a designer achieve a high distribution uniformity,
a key aspect of irrigation efficiency. With a higher irrigation efficiency, more water and
energy can be conserved.
Manufacturability. This is a single software package that will have bugs worked out.
Health and Safety. A better design give the grower the opportunity to focus more on the
health of their crop.
Ethical. The software will help the designer along the process deterring them from
cutting corners on irrigation design.
Social. Having an irrigation system with high distribution uniformity is good for society
as it can potentially lead to more efficient use of water and fertilizer.
Political. Political criteria for this project fall in line with the social aspect as reducing
wasted water and fertilizer can help a grower stay within strict political bounds on
resource use.
Aesthetic. The program is to be extremely user-friendly and easy to follow as well as
have a dark, metro theme to stick to current software norms.

32

APPENDIX B
BERNOULLI TABLE

33

Downhill Bernoulli Table

34

APPENDIX C
RESULTS COMPARISON DATA

35

36

37

38

39

