SOLAR POWERED ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGER

by
Andrew Moradpour
Jessica Bombardier Shaw

Senior Project

ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING DEPARTMENT

California Polytechnic State University: San Luis Obispo

2017

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section

Page

Acknowledgements……………………………………………………………………………………...3
I. Abstract………………………………………………………………………………………....4
II. Background……………………………………………………………………………………..5
III. Requirements and Specifications……………………………………………………………….6
IV. Design…………………………………………………………………………………………..7
V. Integration………………………………………………………………………….……….......8
VI. Testing………………………………………………………………………….……………...11
VII. Conclusions………………………..………………………………….……………………….15
VIII. References………………………………………………………………………….……...…. 16
Appendices
A. Senior Project Analysis………………………………………………………………….…….17
B. Schematic………………………………………………………………………….…………..23
C. Time Schedule Allocation……………………………………………………………..………24

1

LIST OF TABLES AND FIGURES
Tables

Page

Table I: ​Engineering Requirements and Specifications………..…………………….………….....….6
Table II: ​Time to Charge (Current system).………..…………………….…………………………..14
3. Table III: ​Time to Charge (Improved system).………..……………………​.………………….....15
1.
2.

Figures
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

Figure 1: ​Sources of U.S. Electricity Generation, 2016………………………………….………...…...5
Figure 2: ​Solar Panel Cart………………………………………………………….…….......…..…......7
Figure 3: ​Wiring Diagram of Outback Flexman 80 MPPT Solar Charge Controller…….….…...….....8
Figure 4: ​Wire Connector………..…………………….…….………..………………..……...…….….8
Figure 5: ​Circuit Breaker Connection Terminals………..………………………..……………...……..8
Figure 6: ​Battery Terminals ………..…………………….…….………..…………………….…..…....9
Figure 7: ​Shunt Resistor Terminals ………..…………………….…………………….…….….…..….9
Figure 8: ​Back View of the TriMetric Battery Monitor Panel………..………………………....……..10
Figure 9: ​View of the Disconnect Cables………..…………………….…………………….………....10
Figure 10: ​Inverter Connections………..…………………….………………………………………...10
Figure 11:​ Battery to Ford Focus Connection………..…………………….……………………….…..11
Figure 12: ​Charge Controller to Battery Connection………..…………………….…………………...11
Figure 13: ​Battery Monitor to Battery Connection………..…………………….……………………...12
Figure 14: ​Complete Solar Powered Electric Vehicle Charger as Shown in the Senior Project Expo.13
Figure 15: ​Original Estimate Cost………..…………………….……………………………………....18
Figure 16: ​Actual Final Cost of Component Parts………..…………………….……………………...19
Figure 17: ​Final Design of the Solar Powered Electric Vehicle Charger………..……………………..23
Figure 18:​ EE 461 Gantt Chart………..…………………….…….………..……………………..…....24
Figure 19:​ EE 462 Gantt Chart………..……………………....…….………..…………………………24

2

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Andrew Moradpour
I wish to thank my family, friends, and loving girlfriend, who aspire me to be the best person I can be.
Jessica Bombardier Shaw
First off, I would like to thank Dale Dolan for your guidance throughout this entire year, both with this
project and in all the power classes. Thank you to my parents and family for all the love and support
throughout my college years. Thanks to all the professors in the Electrical Engineering Department for
helping me reach graduation. Thank you to Vicky Tarnovetchi for inspiring me to choose Electrical
Engineering. I dedicate my work in this project to my grandfather who finally got his engineer in the
family.

3

ABSTRACT
This project will look into how to create an efficiently-operated solar powered electric vehicle charger.
The solar panel will harvest energy from the sun that will be stored a battery pack to be readily available
to charge an electric vehicle. These stations could be commercialized to be located along a highway, or
personalized for a in-house installation.

4

BACKGROUND
With electric vehicles becoming more affordable every year, investors are starting to see the demand for
charging stations rise as well [1]. We wanted to use this fact and the idea that electric vehicle consumers
are typically environmentally friendly individuals to create a electric vehicle charger using 100%
renewable energy.
As of now, the electric grid in the United States is not nearly as dependent on renewable energy as it is
with fossil fuels [2]. This means that electric vehicle owners that charge their electric vehicle on the
electric grid could be contributing harmful emissions to the environment. We wanted to reduce this
impact as much as a possible by creating an off-the-grid, solar powered electric vehicle charger.

Figure 1: ​Sources of U.S. Electricity Generation, 2016 [2]

5

REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS
Table I: ​Engineering Requirements and Specifications
Engineering Requirement
High voltage
3 prong 1​20V AC output from the
system.

Durable base
System must be able to be installed on
any terrain and capable of
withstanding any weather and remain
online and stable.

Large battery capability
Battery capability must be enough to
provide vehicles with a generous
charge when it the battery is full.

Current flow measurement
The system must be able to display
how much current is entering and
leaving the battery.

System protection
The system shall have some sort of
protection set in place to prepare
against faults and provide a quick
disconnect.

Justification
This provides the user with the ease of
using their at regular electric vehicle
charger that they would normally use
at home.
The system must be able to withstand
normal, everyday use in the elements
in order for it to be practical.

In order to get the most out of this
system, the battery must be large
enough to provide enough charge to
the electric vehicle in the case the user
wants a quick charge.
Total current flow shows the user the
state of the system. This indicator
allows the user to know the status of
the battery which is going to be
important when charging their electric
vehicle.
System protection is necessary to
protect the user and the system itself.

6

DESIGN
Our design was limited to what resources were available for us. Luckily, the majority of the equipment for
this system was provided by our advisor, Dale Dolan, and the Electrical Engineering Department. We
originally envisioned a much larger system with multiple solar panels and batteries to provide a quick
charge time for the electric vehicle but we quickly realized that the amount of materials required would
put us way over our $400 senior project budget. We ended up using only one 435 W solar panel and a
1.2kWh deep cycle battery. The stand for our project was even from an older student's senior project.

Figure 2: ​Solar Panel Cart

The only equipment we had to purchase ourselves was a deep cycle battery and the circuit breaker.
Despite all of this, we were still able to provide an AC 120 V output that allows current to be drawn in a
surprisingly fast manor.
We came up with the design of the system with the help of our advisor over the span of winter and spring
quarter. With his vast knowledge in this field, he helped us incorporate system protection and a way to
display the total current entering and leaving the system using a clever wiring technique, a shunt resistor,
and a battery monitor. The basic components of the design were simple and logical in what would be
needed to convert solar energy into battery energy, then be able to discharge the battery’s energy to be
available for and used by the electric vehicle.
The final design can be found in ​Appendix B.

7

INTEGRATION
1. Connect solar panel to charge controller.
a. Crimp MC4 connectors to 14 AWG wire and make a connection to the positive and
negative terminals of the solar panel.
b. Strip the other end of the 14 AWG wires and connect it to the designed PV+ and PVwire terminals of the charge controller as shown below:

Figure 3: ​Wiring Diagram of Outback Flexman 80 MPPT Solar Charge Controller [3]

2. Connect charge controller to circuit breaker and battery
a. Strip the end of a 4 AWG wire and connect one end to the BAT+ terminal.
b. With the other end of the 4 AWG wire, attach a wire connector and attach it to one side
of the 100A circuit breaker.

8

Figure 4: ​Wire Connector [4]

​Figure 5: ​Circuit Breaker Connection Terminals [5]

c. Do the same with another 4 AWG wire, but this time attach a wire connector to both
sides of the wire.
d. Now connect one end of this wire to the opposite terminal of the circuit breaker and the
other end to the positive terminal of the battery.
e. For the negative terminal, strip one end of a 4 AWG wire and make a connection in the
BAT- terminal of the charge controller.
f. With the other end of this wire, attach a wire connector on. This end of the cable will
connect to the shunt resistor.

Figure 6: ​Battery Terminals [6]

3. Installing the battery monitor
a. Connect the end of the 4 AWG cable that is coming from the BAT - terminal of the
charge controller to one of the top connections of the shunt resistor.
b. On the other side of the shunt resistor, strip and crimp a 2/0 wire and make a connection
to the negative terminal of the battery.

9

Figure 7: ​Shunt Resistor Terminals [7]

c. Open up the battery monitor and strip four 24 AWG wires and feed them into G1, G2,
SIG, and B1+.
d. Locate the side connection lug on the shunt resistor.
e. Connect SIG to the side closest to the negative terminal of the battery.
f. Connect G1 and G2 to the opposite side.
g. Connect B1+ to the positive terminal of the battery using the fuse connector provided.

Figure 8: ​Back View of the TriMetric Battery Monitor Panel [8]

4. Installing the inverter
a. Attach a wire connector to one end of two 2/0 wires.
b. On the other side of both of the wires, attach a wire disconnect connector to provide a
safe way to connect the circuit.
c. Repeat this process so you have two pairs of a male/female disconnect connectors to a
wire connector.
d. With a wire with a male disconnect, make a connection to the connection of the shunt
resistor furthest from the negative terminal of the battery.
e. With the other male wire, make a connection to the positive terminal of the battery.
f. Connect the wires with female disconnects, to the positive and negative terminal of the
inverter.
g. Connect the wire that is connected to the negative terminal of the inverter to the wire
connected to the connector on the shunt resistor farther from the negative terminal of the
battery.
10

h. Connect the wire that is connected to the positive terminal of the inverter to the wire
connected to the positive terminal of the battery.

Figure 9: ​View of the Disconnect Cables

Figure 10:​ Inverter Connectors

11

TESTING
Testing this system was done in multiple stages. We first connected the battery to the inverter to see if the
electric vehicle we used for testing (Ford Focus) would have an issue with the lack of ground in the
system.

Figure 11:​ Battery to Ford Focus Connection

Once we saw the Ford Focus was charging (noted by a blinking light on the charger) we decided to move
on and work on the front end of our system. Our next move was connecting the charge controller to
circuit breaker and powering it with the battery.

Figure 12: ​Charge Controller to Battery Connection

The charge controller appeared to turn on as expected. Next, we set up the battery monitor and configured
it to our 12V battery size.

12

Figure 13: ​Battery Monitor to Battery Connection [8]

The battery monitor was displaying the proper voltage (~12V) and zero current (which is correct since
there was no load in this connection).
After testing each individual part of our system, we decided to tie everything together with the solar
panel. The solar panel used was a part of a previous senior project and is located on a dual-axis adjustable
rack (see ​Figure 1)​.

13

Figure 14: ​Complete Solar Powered Electric Vehicle Charger as Shown in the Senior Project Expo

Once everything was connected the system immediately started charging the Ford Focus. The numbers
recorded that day is shown below:
Charge controller
IN: 55-63V (fluctuating), 6.1A
OUT: 11.4V, 28.6A
Battery Monitor
Charging car: 11.4V, -112A
No load: 12.7V, +25.9A
Inverter
11.1 Vdc, 135-138A
AC Watts, 1250
We knew the battery monitor was operating correctly in the prefered orientation (displaying I​CC​ - I​INV​)
because we were reading a negative current when the car was charging and a positive current when we
disconnected the load.

14

From this information, we came up a time-to-charge calculation.
12 V Battery:
Panel power: 300-400 Wh
Time to charge 1.2 kW battery: 3 - 4 hours
Ford Focus:
Ford focus has a 6.6 kW battery size and 115 mi range.
Our battery is 1.2 kWh.
The Ford focus would be charging at a rate of ​1.5 kWh​ but the battery only “sees” it being discharged at a
rate at about ​1.25 kWh ​due to the solar panel charging the battery as it’s being depleted*.
This means that the battery in our system will only last about 1 hour before it is discharged completely.
This in return proves a “fast charge” of about 26 miles in 1 hour.
115 mi range/6.6 kW = 17.42 mi/kW
(17.42 mi/kW)(1.5 kW) = 26.13 mi
Once the battery is depleted, the EV will no longer charge as fast. This is because the EV will be charged
directly from the solar panel at a rate of 300 - 400 Wh under direct sunlight.
With Battery: 1 hr @ 1.5 kWh
Remainder of car battery: 6.6kW - 1.5 kW = 5.1 kW
Charging the remainder of the battery with just solar panel:
5.1 kW/0.300 kWh = 17 hours @ 300 Wh
5.1 kW/0.400 kWh = 12.75 hours @ 400 Wh
Total time to fully charge battery: ​13.75 - 18 hours**
Table II: ​Time to Charge (Current system)*

Battery

3 - 4 hours

Ford Focus

13.75 - 18 hours

*​Assuming we have a fully charged battery, fully depleted ford focus, and under direct sunlight
**Note that this would not be possible to charge the remainder of the battery in one day as there is
approximately 14 hours of sunlight per day in San Luis Obispo this time of year [9].

15

CONCLUSIONS
This senior project has taught us both a tremendous amount about renewable energy, systems engineering,
and electric vehicles. On top of this, we both feel that we have improved time management, organization
skills, and teamwork. Despite the speed bumps with finding the resources to complete this project, we
would say that we are both pleased with our efforts in producing a working prototype for the senior
project expo.
One thing we would like to emphasize is how unpractical the system is with just one solar panel and
battery. We discovered that it could take almost ​18 hours​ under direct sunlight to fully charge a ford focus
with our system. This is impossible at any time of year in San Luis Obispo, where there’s only 14 hours
of daylight and those hours of sun aren’t efficiently collected by a solar panel, even with a dual-axis
tracker built into the system because it will not likely achieve direct sunlight. This means that this system
will take multiple days to fully charge an electric vehicle, and no one would realistically use that type of
charger when they could much more easily plug it into an electrical outlet and charge in just a few hours.
With just adding one extra solar panel and battery in parallel with its kind, it cuts the time to charge in
more than half.
Table III: ​Time to Charge (Improved system)***

Battery

1.5 - 2 hours

Ford Focus

6.5 - 8 hours

***​Assuming we have a 2 fully charged batteries, fully depleted ford focus, and 2 panels under direct
sunlight
This is a huge improvement in overall system efficiency and becomes a much more practical system. The
extra batteries are essential to keep the voltage above the shut-off level that the inverter activates. During
the senior project expo, as the Focus was being charged with this system, when the inverter voltage
dropped to around 10.7 V, it would no longer allow the Focus to draw current and charge the vehicle.
This took a matter of hours, if not less than a full hour to occur. This is a major flaw in the system, with
an easy remedy of adding more deep cycle batteries to the system. With a higher budget or additional
resources we could’ve built upon our system to make it more practical for consumer use, but we are
happy with a working finished product.
We’d like to give a big thanks to our advisor, Dale Dolan, for sticking with us throughout this year and
being a great help with the design, construction, and allowing us to borrow so much of his personal
resources. We truly could not have done this without him and we wish him the best in his future
endeavors.

16

REFERENCES
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

MarketWatch, “​Electric Vehicle Charging Station Market”. [Online].
Available: ​http://www.marketwatch.com​. [Accessed: June 8, 2017].
U.S. Energy Information Administration, “Electricity in the U.S.”. [Online].
Available: ​https://www.eia.gov​. [Accessed: June 8, 2017].
Outback Power, “FLEXmax Series Charge Controllers,” FLEXmax 80, FLEXmax 60 Owner's Manual,
Feb. 2012.
Lowes, “Hillman 4-Count Ring Wire Connectors”. [Online]. Available: ​https://www.lowes.com​.
[Accessed: June 8, 2017].
Powerwerx, “Resettable Circuit Breaker Cooper Bussmann”. [Online]. Available: ​https://powerwerx.com​.
[Accessed: June 8, 2017].
BatteriesPlus, “D​eep Cycle 100AH AGM Battery Duracell Ultra 12V SLA Sealed Lead Acid”. [Online].
Available: ​https://battiesplus.com​. [Accessed: June 8, 2017].
Solar-Electric, “Deltec 500 amp, 50 millivolt current shunt”. [Online].
Available: ​https://www.solar-electric.com​. [Accessed: June 8, 2017].
Tri-Metric, “Battery system monitor,” INSTALLER’S INSTRUCTIONS FOR TRI-METRIC, Jan. 2015.
Timeanddate, “San Luis Obispo, California, USA — Sunrise, Sunset, and Daylength, June 2017”. [Online].
Available: h
​ ttps://www.timeanddate.com/​. [Accessed: June 8, 2017].

17

APPENDIX: A — ANALYSIS OF SENIOR PROJECT DESIGN
Project Title: Solar Powered Electric Vehicle Charger
Student’s Names:
Jessica Bombardier Shaw, Andrew Moradpour

Student’s Signatures:
Advisor’s Name:

Dale Dolan

Date: 6/9/17
A. Summary of Functional Requirements
I.
II.
III.

The system shall provide fast, reliable, and clean energy to an electric vehicle.
The system shall obtain its energy via a solar panel and store it using batteries.
The system shall be compatible with all electric vehicles.

B. Primary Constraints
I.
The main difficulty was obtaining all materials necessary to implement the design. Most

II.
III.

of the equipment required cost more than $200 each, and the Cal Poly senior project
budget is only $200 per person.
Our budget limited the amount of battery storage space available to use which in turn
limited how fast we could charge an electric vehicle
Physically, the solar cart we were using could only support one solar panel. This affects
the input power in the system.

C. Economic
I.

II.

III.

Human Capital​ – This system requires a small amount of engineers to oversee
production. There will be troubleshooting involved along with a continued effort to
increase efficiency and reduce costs.
Financial Capital​ – There will be a large amount of investment needed up-front to
initialize manufacturing of this system. It is also unclear what the market for this type of
product might be or the price prospective customers would be willing to pay for it at this
time. The initial price might be much more than a customer is willing to pay and then the
business would not be able to maintain production. It might be too soon for a product of
this kind to be on the market. But, for an individual willing to make a personal
investment and create this system themself, the return on their investment will be great by
reducing their electricity bill from their EV charging costs.
Natural Capital ​– This product will utilize several electrical components including a
solar panel, a battery, and an inverter. The design is meant to reduce carbon emissions
caused by utilities that still burn fossil fuels which in turn powers electric vehicles, but
18

IV.

there is an environmental impact in regards to production of solar panels and mining for
solar cell resources, along with the other metals and elements involved with the
electronics of the system. Proper recycling of these components would be encouraged and
accepted as we are marketing to environmental conscious consumers.
Manufactured Capital -​- All components used in this system are manufacturable
components. The cost would reduce tremendously if the system was manufactured rather
than individual components being purchased and assembled by hand. There will be in
increase in jobs related to power systems, power electronics, manufacturing, and sales.

Where/when costs/benefits accrue:
The costs will all be upfront with the purchase of components for the system. There may be
additional costs down the line as the battery and solar panel degrades (the Deep Cycle 100AH
AGM Battery lifetime is 4-7 years and the 435W SunPower Solar Panel has about a 40 year
lifetime). The benefits will accrue once the amount of electricity or cost for payments at public
charging stations surpass the cost of the system. This exact amount of time will depend on the
time of day the EV is normally charged at home and the cost of electricity at that time; the
amount of charging done at public stations and the average amount paid; and the final cost of the
system to the individual.

Figure 15: ​Original Estimate Cost

19

Figure 16: ​Actual Final Cost of Component Parts

Note: items in bold and italics were items owned by Cal Poly, the EE Department, or Dale Dolan.
Items unitalicized/unbolded were items purchased by the students for the project and donated
back to the department.

20

Earning and Profits
The intended use of the project is personal, at-home EV charging. From this project we would
only earn based on the amount of money saved. Those selling the components profit, unless the
entire system became manufactured by one company.
Timing
This is the perfect time for a product like this to emerge. Electric vehicles are on the rise and
more people are becoming environmentally conscious and aware of their own carbon footprint. In
addition to this, it is becoming more cost-effective for homeowners to install solar on their homes
to reduce their electricity bill. The combination of these factors will lead more people to seek out
ways to continue in being “green” and reducing energy costs while using clean energy options.
If manufactured on a commercial basis:
Estimated number of devices sold per year
Estimated manufacturing cost for each device
Estimated purchase price for each device
Estimated profit per year
Estimated cost for user to operate device

= 100
= $2,906.84
= $2,906.84*(1.3) = $3,778.90
= ($3,778.892- $2,906.84)*10 = $8720.52
= $0

D. Environmental
I.
When manufacturing this system, the factory will consume additional power that may or not be
the result of a renewable resource. If human workers are used at the plant, additional fossil fuels
will be burned if they travel to work in a combustible-engine vehicle. Therefore, with each unit
built, additional fumes and chemicals will be emitted to the environment.
II.
There is environmental impacts and concerns in mining the elements used for the solar cells. To
reduce that, the optimal solar panel would be one that created their cells using recycled glass for
the silicon cells.
III.
The natural resource/ecosystem impact would be minimal. If the system was installed on a stand
on one’s property, the stand dug into the ground would be no more damaging than a light pole
installation and the solar panel mounted on top would be no more impactful than a backyard patio
set umbrella. Most people would likely choose to install the solar panels to their roof, eliminating
both these concerns.
IV.
The project is intending to help the environment by increasing the appeal of electric vehicles,
reducing the amount of energy required on a utility system to charge these cars, and reduce the
amount of fossil fuels required to meet the demands of the system. Overall, the intention is to
reduce carbon emissions and create a completely clean electric vehicle.

21

E. ​ ​Manufacturing
I.
We estimate that we will sell a few amount of these devices initially (average of ~5 units/yr) and
then after a few years reach some sort of linear progression (15 units/yr).
II.
The estimated manufacturing cost can be taken from our bill of materials: $2,906.84. Later in our
products lifetime we will have a larger demand for our product so we can begin to buy in bulk
from the manufacturer in order to save money.
III.
The problems we may face while manufacturing this system is finding top of the line
manufacturers that we can rely on to provide us with a safe and sturdy product that is also
cost-effective and produced in the most environmentally-friendly way.
F. Sustainability
I.
There is degradation expected with the components of the system. The lead acid batteries we will
using tend to last 4-7 years depending on the amount of use. After that, they will need to be
replaced. It is also wise to have the battery checked for leaks periodically. Additionally, it is also
expected that the solar panels will degrade and lose efficiency after 20-40 years. It is also
encouraged to maintain panels by cleaning and checking for damages periodically.
II.
The solar panels needed for this project contributions to the supply of silicon that we have on this
planet. Luckily, Silicon is a very abundant element and makes up a large chunk of the earth’s
mass. On top of this, additional metal would have to be mined in order to make up the system’s
build. As of today, the components used for the system are considered sustainable. There will
need to be a continued effort in electronics and metallurgic recycling to ensure these components
remain sustainable.
III.
The most important upgrade on the current system would be to add additional batteries. As the
system is, it can not fully charge an electric vehicle. The addition of batteries and possible solar
panels will allow the system to charge the electric vehicle in a more reasonable amount of time.
IV.
Some possible issues or challenges associated with upgrading the design would be additional
material costs & maintenance fees that would have to be added to the total cost of the product.
G. Ethical
I.
The use of this product promotes clean and renewable energy. In order to uphold these positive
implications, all processes along the way must be clean and ethical.
II.
There could be ethical implications if the system was installed on a stand and created shading or
hindered views of one's neighbors.
H. Health and Safety
I.
The idea of the system is to reduce carbon emissions from combustion vehicles and electric
utilities that get their fuel from nonrenewable sources. As small of an impact as this project might
make in the overall scheme of things, it is important nonetheless as it helps reduce harmful
emissions.
II.
There may be concerns with the current manufacturing process of solar panels and other
electronics used in the system. These concerns would need to be studied and addressed if the
project was manufactured.
III.
The system itself shall be sturdy and safe to operate to avoid any damages that may occur to an
operator. To ensure this, our manufacturers must have proof of a safe workplace for all of their
22

workers and a quality assurance team that prevents defects in our materials used that may cause
issues to our consumers.
I. Social and Political
I.
The main impact this project would have on society would be a positive one. An electric vehicle
powered completely by the sun promotes the use of electric vehicles and the production of energy
in a clean and responsible manner.
II.
There might be delay on efforts to expand electric vehicles and reduce fossil fuel use with the
current US administration. This might have repercussions on products that encourage the use of
renewable energies over fossil fuels. The exact impact of this is currently unknown. This project
is currently the best option for an individual to own and produce electricity on their own.
J. Development
I.
Developments that are currently being worked towards are:
A. More efficient/cheaper commercial solar panels
B. More efficient/cheaper energy storage
C. DC Supercharging
II.
From these developments, electric vehicles (along with renewable energy) will become more
abundant.

23

APPENDIX B: PROJECT SCHEMATIC

Figure 17: ​Final Design of the Solar Powered Electric Vehicle Charger

24

APPENDIX C: TIME SCHEDULE ALLOCATION

25

