Creation and Analysis of an Electric and Magnetic Model of a
Micro Ion Thruster

A Senior Project
presented to
The Faculty of the Aerospace Engineering Department
California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo

In Partial Fulfillment
Of the Requirements for the Degree
Bachelor of Science in Aerospace Engineering

By
Maxwell Bodnar
June, 2013

© 2013 Maxwell Bodnar

Creation and Analysis of an Electric and Magnetic Model
of a Micro Ion Thruster
Maxwell Bodnar1
California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo
This report explores the magnetic and electric fields within the Cal Poly Miniature
Xenon Ion (MiXI) Thruster V3 in order to create a comprehensive electric and magnetic
model of the plasma chamber to analyze and test the current thruster configurations and
changes to the existing thruster. This model is used to analyze the operation and efficiency of
the ion thruster and the plasma environment within the plasma chamber. This model
explores the ionization and electron collision rates during operation of the thruster to
measure the efficiency of the current thruster configuration, also determining the theoretical
Isp and thrust of the ion thruster.
This model was created from the design and validated against the results of the CP
MiXI V3 thruster, designed and tested by David Knapp. Considering a test case of Knapp’s
thruster, the model predicts primary electron impact probabilities at 37.15%, a mass
utilization of 62.92%, an Isp of 2057 s, and a thrust of 1.09 mN. The values of mass
utilization, Isp, and thrust are in error by 109.74%, 37.16%, and -9.07%, respectively, when
compared to the test case [3]. Further refinements of this model and analysis tools will assist
in creating a more efficient and optimized ion thruster.

Nomenclature

SCCM

=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=

2

Area [m ]
Magnetic Field [Tesla]
Electric Field [Volts/meter]
Current [Amperes]
Length [meters]
Mass [Kilogram]
Mass flow rate [Kilogram/second]
Plasma Density [particle/m3]
Power [Watts]
Larmor Radius [Meter]
Standard Cubic Centimeters per Minute
Temperature [Kelvin]
Thrust [Newton]
Voltage
Velocity [meters/second]
Debye Length [Meters]
Efficiency
Plasma Potential [Volts]
Beam Half Angle Divergence [radians]
Density [kg/m3]
Ionization cross section [m2]

_________________________________
1
Student, Aerospace Engineering Department, mbodnar@calpoly.edu.

1
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Subscripts
a
b
c
d
e
i
p
s
0

=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=

Acceleration grid
Beam
Cathode
Discharge
Electron
Ion
Primary
Screen grid
Total

Constants
=
=
=
=
=
=

Fundamental charge
Gravitational acceleration
Boltzman’s Constant
Electron mass
Xenon particle mass
Permittivity of Free Space

1.602176487 x 10-19 C
9.807 m/s2
1.3806488 x 10-23 m2kg / s2K
9.1093822 x 10-31 kg
2.1960351 x 10-25 kg
8.8541878 x 10-12 s4A2 / m3kg

I. Introduction

S

PACE based electric propulsion systems provide many advantages over more traditional chemical propulsion
systems in many regards, most import being propulsive efficiency. Less propellant is required to alter the
trajectory of a spacecraft utilizing an electric propulsion system. Electric propulsion (EP) systems are used for orbit
raising and station keeping on high power satellites as a substitute to traditional chemical propulsion systems. A
subset of EP systems has been developed recently called micro ion thrusters, having a thrust in the range of 0.01 –
10 mN while still maintaining high efficiency. Several universities and research labs are working to develop a flight
capable micro ion thruster with the goal of using these smaller thrusters for attitude adjustment and control [1] [3].
Several types of EP systems exist, but the two most developed technologies for flight application are gridded
ion thrusters and Hall-effect thrusters. An ion thruster creates thrust by electrically accelerating ionized fuel particles
away from the spacecraft via an electric potential field. Hall-effect thrusters achieve this by creating a quasi-static
electron cloud that accelerates the ions while a gridded ion thruster accelerates the ions through a series of charged
grids. This report discusses the design of a model for the Miniature Xenon Ion Thruster (MiXI), a gridded ion
thruster 3 cm in diameter that has been designed and tested over the past few years [1].
The micro ion thrusters, and all ion thrusters, perform by creating plasma within the thruster and ionizing a
propellant, most commonly Xenon gas, and accelerating the electrically charged particles to create thrust [2]. One of
the most common plasma generation techniques is to use a heated cathode filament to bombard the inert gas
propellant with electrons, causing them to ionize. Electrons discharge from the cathode and are drawn to the walls of
the ion thruster, the anode. Magnet fields are employed in this region, called the plasma discharge chamber, to turn
the electrons, preventing them from immediately impacting the anode and increasing the change the electrons will
impact with a neutral propellant particle. The ionized propellant is then accelerated out the thruster, accelerating the
thruster and creating thrust via Newton’s third law. A diagram of an ion thruster showing some of the components
and the steps of operation is shown in the figure below.

2
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Figure 1. Cutaway of an ion thruster depicting the components and steps of operation. [7].
In 2005, Richard Wirz wrote his thesis involving the discharge plasma in small ion thrusters [1]. His design was
the first of a small scope of small ion thrusters that exist and are being designed today. Major characteristics of his
thruster it was three centimeters in diameter, had a three ring magnetic containment field design, and a coiled
tungsten filament cathode (CTFC). His design was adapted from larger ion thrusters in an attempt to utilize the large
designs for a much smaller system. He tested and varied different magnetic structures and other physical models in
his research. Important to his research and study was the implementation of an advanced plasma discharge model
that he developed for determining the most optimal physical and E&M configuration and geometry. This model
accounts for the five major chamber design parameters: chamber geometry, magnetic field, discharge cathode,
propellant feed, and ion extraction grid characteristics. The discharge model was used to create the first version of
the miniature xenon ion thruster.
In 2012, David Knapp used much of the work of Wirz in creating a micro ion thruster and attempted to
implement a hollow tube cathode as the discharge cathode inside the ion thruster chamber [3]. He work centered on
using the existing design from Wirz and adding the hollow cathode, building the thruster, and testing the new
design. He obtained data relating to the efficiency, power, and thrust of this new thruster variant. His work also
included using the current structure of the micro ion thruster and his attempt to optimize the magnetic fields to
increase the primary ion collision and increase the plasma stability. While the implementation of the hollow cathode
was successful in terms that he was able to create a working test apparatus with the hollow cathode, the efficiency of
his thruster design was not to that of the micro ion thruster of Wirz that was designed with a CTFC. The attempt to
resolve the limited lifespan of the CTFC with the purpose of creating a long duration and space worthy micro ion
thruster ended up creating other inefficiencies in the workings of the micro ion thruster.
A. Project Scope
The purpose of this project and report is to analyze the equations with regards to plasma flow and ionization
within the discharge chamber and to create a model of the electric and magnetic structure of the existing micro ion
thruster. This model will be used to analyze the current design and to effect changes to the system. These changes
are ones that are designed to increase the operational efficiency of the thruster, increasing the mass utilization of the
propellant, creating a higher Isp thruster, and increasing the thrust while ideally lowering power requirements. In
this report, the creating and verification of the model are presented with the goal of using this model for the eventual
optimization of the micro ion thruster.

3
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

In order to effect changes on the operation and design of an ion thruster, it is important to understand the design
characteristics and plasma physics within an ion thruster. As the analysis of the plasma environment is very
complex, several assumptions need to be made at this stage of design. The assumption that the plasma both inside
and outside the discharge chamber is quasineutral will be utilized. Quasineutrality is essential for the current 0dimensional simplified analysis where it can be assumed that the plasma is of uniform density, temperature, and
charge and that the ion and electron density is equal [2]. While these assumptions are not comprehensive and truly
the case for this thruster, it provides a decent structure to the plasma characteristics for this analysis.

II. Ion Thruster Design Considerations
It is known an ion thruster produces thrust by acceleration charged ions within a plasma through grids out the
rear of the spacecraft, thus accelerating the spacecraft. In order for this to occur, there must be ions and plasma
formed within the discharge chamber. Fuel, Xenon or Argon gas, is injected into the discharge chamber as neutrally
charged atoms where high energy electrons from the cathode impact and ionize the fuel atoms. The resultant ions
can then be accelerated to produce thrust. The very important aspect to this process is the ionization of the fuel
particles. In order to maximize thrust, it is desirable to have a high rate and percent of ionization. This is achieved
through the creation and manipulation of electric and magnetic fields to confine the electrons so they have a higher
probability of impacting the neutral particles with sufficient energy.
To ionize a fuel particle, an electron emitted from the discharge cathode must impact with enough energy to
ionize that atom. Without the presence of magnetic fields within the thruster, the electrons emitted from the cathode
would immediately travel to the walls of the discharge chamber, the anode of this system. This would mean that the
chance of ionization is very low as the mean free path of the electron is very low and its duration within the chamber
very short. Before discussing the specifics of impact probabilities, it is necessary to understand a few values
important to plasmas in general.
A. Plasma Properties
There are a four main parameters that can be used to describe a plasma: the plasma temperature, , plasma
density, , plasma potential,
, and the floating potential, . These four values are important to determine the
behavior of the plasma and in evaluating how the plasma interacts with the ion thruster. A number of these values
are not easy to define by the input conditions but can be experimentally determined once the thruster is assembled
and tested. Another important value to understand is the Larmor radius, , the characteristic length over which the
charges undergo cyclic motion within a magnetic field. In general, models used to describe the plasma behavior and
characteristics can be modeled by fluid equations, representing the hydro magnetic formulation of the plasma.
The electrons injected into the discharge chamber from the hollow cathode can be viewed as fluid particles
filling the volume of the discharge chamber. Considering a magnetic field free region, the electrons will
immediately travel to the anode walls. There will be a current created from the charged particles emitting from the
cathode and travelling to the anode represented by [2]
(1)
where
is the discharge current,
is the electron density in the plasma, is the fundamental charge,
is the
emitted electron velocity (a function of the discharge cathode’s potential and related to the electron temperature),
and
is the loss area for the electrons. In order to minimize the electron loss, you want to minimize the discharge
current. Decreasing the values for density or velocity means the electrons impacting fuel atoms will be less frequent
and less energetic; therefore decreasing the loss area is one of the goals when designing an ion thruster. The loss
area for the electrons can be manipulated by adding in a magnetic field and is defined by [2]

(2)

where
is the magnetic field strength at the walls,
is the mass of the electron, and
is the length of the
magnetic cusp. The area loss’s dependency of the magnetic cusp length is derived from the fact that the electrons
spiral along the strong magnetic field lines emanating from the magnetic cusp. These values are used to determine
the probability, , that an electron will make a collision with a fuel atom and not be lost directly to the anode when
in the region of the high strength magnetic fields, represented by [2]
4
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

(3)
where
is the neutral particle density,
is the cross sectional area of collision, and
is the volume of the
discharge chamber. It is desirable to have a high probability of impact within the discharge chamber as more impacts
create more charged ions. To increase the probability of impact, there are a few design variables within the ion
thruster you can change, the most interesting of them being the magnetic field strength. The value represented in
equation 2 is the magnetic field strength at the surface of the anode at the magnetic cusp. It is apparent that to get a
high value of , you would desire a high value of
at the anode walls. The other design variable that can be
changed is the volume of the discharge chamber. With a larger volume, the probability of collision within the
discharge chamber increases. This poses a problem for smaller ion thrusters as the volume to area ratio is much
smaller than those of larger thrusters, NEXT or NSTAR, and leads to a lower probability of impact for MiXI.
Design of the magnetic confinement of the electrons is key to the stable operation of the thruster and the
ionization process. From the standpoint of impact probability, it would be desirable to increase the magnetic field
strength as high as possible. This would prevent the emitted electrons from being lost to the anode and increase the
probability of ionization. However, there are many other characteristics of the plasma and thruster operation that
need to be considered. One such value is the plasma potential. Through experimentation and analysis, it has been
determined that the plasma potential for stable plasma production within an ion thruster cannot be a negative value.
If the plasma potential becomes negative, the ionization process breaks down and the plasma becomes unstable,
rapidly re-associating and spontaneously changing the electron density inside the chamber. The plasma potential
is described by the equation [2]

(4)

where
is the electron temperature,
is the ion mass,
is the electron mass,
is the screen area,
is the
transparency factor of the screen, is the discharge current, is the beam current,
is the anode surface area,
is the ion confinement factor for the Bohm current,
is the primary electron density,
is the primary electron
velocity,
is the plasma electron density, and
is the ion acoustic velocity. For this analysis of stable plasma
operation in a 0-dimensional plasma environment and assuming quasi-neutrality of the plasma, it is enough to
understand how the plasma potential changes with the magnetic field strength. The quantity represented by
is the
hybrid anode area, a value similar to the primary electron loss area in that it has an inverse relation to magnetic field
strength . By inspection, it becomes apparent that increasing will cause the potential to decrease. Increasing the
magnetic strength at the cusps too greatly will cause the plasma to become unstable at the boundaries, negatively
affecting the entirety of the ionization process and the stability of the plasma.
Another important plasma characteristic to consider that is greatly affected by the magnetic field strength and
shape is the plasma uniformity. When the fuel particles are eventually ionized, they will start to turn based upon the
magnetic field within the ionization chamber. When they are accelerated through the electric grids, it is more
effective to have a uniform ion distribution at the grid face. A magnetic field that is turning as the ions cross the
grids will cause the ions to accelerate with a small radial component, decreasing the overall thrust. While the net
radial acceleration results to zero, the overall acceleration vector is less than it could be if the magnetic field and
plasma distribution at the grids were more uniform.
B. Magnetic Structure Formulation
Currently, the optimum design for the magnetic fields for ion thrusters uses permanent magnets in a ring-cusp
structure [1]. Over the years, the design has improved from uniform fields using linear magnets to this ring cusp
structure. This provides, within the plasma and discharge chamber, the areas of high magnetic field strength near the
cusps (to improve probability of impact) and low enough magnetic field strength overall (to limit plasma potential).
The following figure is from David Knapp’s thesis and is his rendition of the current magnetic field structure within
the micro-ion thruster.

5
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Figure 2: Magnetic field design within a cylindrical ion thruster. This represents an axially symmetric
model of the fields. The numbers provide a scale for size within the chamber, measured in mm. [3]
The blue lines represent the magnetic field lines of equal strength. The higher density of the field lines also
means a higher relative magnetic flux. From this image it should be apparent where the three distinct magnetic rings
are located, one at the base and two along the walls.
The magnetic fields created within the discharge chamber are generated through the use of permanent magnets.
When choosing the permanent magnets to build into an ion thruster, it is important to consider the surface strength
because of the impact on the ionization and potential, as mentioned before. It is also important to understand the
thermal properties of the magnet and the thermal radiation from the plasma generation and how that heat can
degrade the magnet, an area of future research. There are numerous aspects to choosing the permanent magnets
cusps to take into consideration.
Modeling the magnets can able to be completed through considering each magnet as a simple magnetic
monopole. Using Maxwell’s equations and Laplace’s equations, the result for the magnetic potential,
or , in
terms of distance and angle from the vertical axis can be determined by
(5)
The values in the summation arise from the Legendre polynomials, with as the Legendre index. The value
is
the magnetic moments of the multipole expansion, is the radius from the magnet, and
are the Legendre
polynomial variables. This equation is able to be solved to explicitly determine the magnetic field for distance and
angle.
(6)

6
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

The value
is the dipole magnetic moment. This value is unique to the source of the magnetic field and takes
various forms depending on the source of the field. For a permanent magnet,
becomes
(7)
where
is the volume of the magnet and
is the magnetic perveance specification of the magnet, sometimes
known as the residual induction. The perveance is a value specific to the material of the magnet and the quality and
uniformity of the metal or ceramic. Considering real magnets and physical dimensions rather than the ideal dipole
moment means there are some variations between what the equations and models will calculate and what are
experimentally determined or measured. For computer analysis, ideal magnetic models are assumed, but it is always
important to understand physical limitations of equations. Currently, the magnetic model analysis is calculated using
a program called Finite Element Method Magnetics (FEMM). The operation of FEMM and the resultant electric and
magnetic models will be discussed later.
C. Single Particle Motion
Understanding the magnetic fields within the discharge chamber allows for an understanding of the electron and
ion motion within the thruster. Following the Lorentz equation
(8)
where is the force vector acting on the charged particle, is the fundamental charge (with appropriate sign) is
the vector of the electric field, is the vector of the velocity, and is the vector of the magnetic field. The electron
motion is governed almost explicitly through this equation. This exact motion of a particle understandably becomes
more complex when accounting for external fields applied to the plasma and internal magnetic and electric fields
generated from the moving particles and is highly dependent upon the location of the particle. In ion thrusters, the
magnetic field effects dominate the electric field effects for most of the electron motion due to the electron’s very
high velocity, with the electric field effects only dominating when very close to the screen grid. Using a very
advanced model and an implicit particle-pushing algorithm, a projected path for a single ion was formulated by Dr.
Wirz in this thesis research [1]. The electron motion, shown in the following figure, describes some very interesting
effects and generalities of plasma formation within the chamber.
The electron is created from the cathode at the left and initially travels to the right. Slight perturbances in the
electron emission will vary the initial exit path slightly. As the electron travels to the far end of the ionization
chamber, the electron will interact with the screen grid and bounce back into the chamber. The screen grid is
charged to a higher potential than that of the cathode, more negative with respect to the plasma. This means that all
the electrons that want to travel out of the thruster are reflected back into the chamber by the screen grid
As the electron moves back towards the cathode side of the chamber, it will follow the magnetic field lines to
the center of the magnetic ring at the base. As the electron moves into a region of stronger magnetic fields, the
magnetic flux must remain constant. The particle will accelerate its orbital motion while the linear motion decreases,
ultimately reversing its linear motion. This effect is known as magnetic mirroring and is visually apparent in the
regions of Figure 2 where the electrons path is narrowed and travelling towards the magnetic cusps. This
phenomenon is very important and the effect can be simplified and was displayed in equation 2; the high magnetic
field strength attenuated the rate at which electrons will impact with the anode wall. The electron continues
bouncing along through the chamber, reflecting away from the surfaces due to magnetic or electric effects, until it
runs out of energy, ideally due to impacts with fuel particles, and succumbing to the attractive force to the anode
walls and being absorbed. The electron will be absorbed in a region where the magnetic cusp exists as the attractive
electric effect overcomes the magnetic mirroring effect.
Because of the relative masses within the ionization chamber, the electrons move significantly faster than the
neutral particles and the ions. For much of the analysis, it can be stated that the neutrals are not moving relative to
the electrons and ionization occurs due to the electron motion.

7
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Figure 3: Single electron motion within the ionization chamber. The electron is always contained
within the ionization chamber. Important areas to pay attention to are the regions near the magnetic
cusps. [1]
With an understanding of the process and some of the requirements for ionization of fuel particles within the
discharge chamber, it is necessary to analyze the motion of the ions. All charged particles follow the Lorentz force,
equation 8, but there are other forces that influence ion motion that are not important to electron motion. As
mentioned before, the ion velocity is very slow by comparison to the electrons, thus the magnetic force from the
Lorentz equation is not as significant. The static fields from the screen and accelerator grids pull the ions to the grids
and out of the chamber. In addition to the Lorentz force, the ions experience forces due to the pressure gradient of
the fuel particles and the plasma pressure due to collisions within the plasma. The equation describing the ion
motion in the plasma becomes [2]
(9)
where is the ion mass,
is the ion density,
is the pressure gradient from the fuel input,
is the collision
frequency between evections and ions within the plasma,
is the average thermal velocity of the electrons, and
is the average thermal velocity of the ions. The first term on the right of the equation is the standard Lorentz force,
the second term is considered the pressure gradient term, and the third term is the plasma pressure term and is
governed by collisions within the plasma. The ions move slowly by comparison to the electrons, so the value of
within the Lorentz force term becomes small. The pressure gradient from the fuel inlet is also negligible as
the fuel being injected is very small and is it a near constant pressure within the discharge chamber. Equation 9 then
becomes dominated by the plasma pressure term. The collision frequency and the velocities are directly related to
the temperature/energy of the electrons and ions, which are based upon energy of the electrons emitted from the
cathode and the resultant collisions with the ions [2]. However, the plasma pressure term needs to consider the
summation of all collisions to determine ion motion as a whole. When considering impacts on all sides from random
electron motion, the plasma pressure term will net to zero and cancel.
The end result of the ion motion is much simpler than the electron motion and can be described qualitatively
very simply. The electric field gradient from the cathode and the grid will make the positively charged ions travel
towards the grid side of the thruster. The positively charged anode walls will compress the positively charged ions
and group them towards the center axis of the thruster where the internal repulsive force from the ion density will
stabilize the compression. Lastly, as alluded to by the previous image and described above, the electron collisions
with the ions occur in a very random manner. This means that the directional vector sum of this term can be

8
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

cancelled out for a first order analysis. The resultant ion motion can be described as an ionized cloud localized along
the central axis moving slowly towards the grids, described by
(10)
There is a simplified quantities value that can be used as a first order estimation of the single particle motion
within the plasma called the Larmor radius. The Larmor radius is generally used to represent the radius of circular
motion of a charged particle moving in a uniform magnetic field. In this model, the Larmor radius can be used to
estimate the characteristic length of the thruster to sufficiently trap the electrons while having the ions independent
of the trapping effects of the magnetic field. Constraining the Larmor radius of the electrons to a less than the
characteristic length of the thruster will mean the electrons will oscillate within the thruster. With the Larmor radius
of the ions greater than the characteristic length of the thruster and the magnetic fields within, the ions are relatively
unconstrained by the magnetic fields in their motion and will move based upon the equations formulated above. The
Larmor radius for the electron can be calculated by [2]

(11)

Similarly, the Larmor radius of the ions can be calculated by [2]

(12)

D. Efficiency and Thrust
With an understanding of how the ionization of the propellant occurs and the resultant ionized propellant
motion, the last step is acceleration the charged particles and producing thrust. The ionized cloud reaches the screen
grid, passes through the screen grid and is accelerated towards the acceleration grid.
Once the positively charged ions reach the grids, the ions will be accelerated across a relatively high potential
difference once they pass the screen grid. The difference can be on the order of 1.5 kV across the span of a few
millimeters. In the NSTAR thruster, the grids accelerate the ions at a rate of 8.7x10 11 m/s2, reaching speeds of about
35,000 m/s when passing the acceleration grid. That high propellant acceleration is what accelerates the spacecraft
in the opposite direction, providing thrust to the spacecraft.
There are very complicated fluid dynamics that are associated with this flow of the ions through the grids. Ion
optics describes the area within plasma discharge models that deal with how the individual ions travel through the
apertures of the grid and is at the core of Wirz’s PhD thesis [1]. Simplifying assumptions within the current model
ignore the losses due to ions impacting the acceleration grid and assumes all ions that pass through the screen grid
accelerate the spacecraft. With these assumptions, the thrust, , can be calculated as [2]
(13)
where is the beam current,
is the beam potential, and is the half angle divergence of the beam exiting the
thruster. This divergence value arises partially from ion optics and from a non uniform electric and magnetic field
across the grids and is assumed to be zero for this analysis.
A very important measure of efficiency of the thruster is the mass utilization of the propellant. During
operation, if there is unionized fuel that escapes the thruster, that fuel is wasted and the performance of the thruster
is lessened. Mass efficiency is calculated as [2]
(14)
where

is the mass flow rate of the propellant into the thruster.

9
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

The last measure of efficiency for this analysis is specific impulse, Isp, and can be calculated in two ways given
by [2]

(15)

III. Model
One of the goals of this research was to create a comprehensive magnetic and electric model from the existing
design created by Wirz and Knapp. I was able to use the technical drawings, diagrams, and knowledge of the system
to create a complete magnetic and electric model using FEMM. FEMM is an open source analysis tool that performs
finite element analysis on permanent magnets, electromagnets, electrostatics, and electrodynamics systems [4]. It
was created by Dr. David Meeker and provides an accurate model of magnetostatic and electrostatic field
interactions for use in this research. The model was built by creating a .dxf file of the structure of the ion thruster
and the location of the electrical and magnetic components. A .dxf file is a simplistic way to represent structures
using points and curves and is used as a method of data transfer between solid modeling programs. The file in this
case represents the physical structure of the thruster, including the ionization chamber, the cathode, screen and
acceleration grids, the permanent magnets, and all the other components of the ion thruster important to this
analysis.
Once the physical system is described in FEMM, the material and magnetic characteristics needed to be
specified. The structure is then assigned the material or material properties of the anode, cathode, grids, etc. The
magnets and polarity direction are specified and assigned to their representative blocks in the model. A full
representation of the axisymmetric model is shown in the figure below. The labels and colors are to provide a
representation between the materials that make up the thruster. The anode wall and the main structure of the ion
thruster is made of non conductive stainless steel, represented by the light blue regions. The magnets, shown in dark
grey, are attached to the structure via ferrous steel, shown in green. A machinable ceramic MACOR, shown in
purple, is used to attach and insulate the charged anode with the charged grids, shown in red, and to separate the
cathode assembly from the rest of the thruster. The rest of the white space is empty space; the arc around the edge
represents the asymptotic boundary of the analyzed space. The left edge is the centerline of the thruster about which
this axisymmetric model is built.
The permanent magnets used in the thruster model are those chosen in Knapp’s thesis [3]. They are Samarium
Cobalt grade 27 magnets and were chosen since they provide the desired magnetic field strength while having a high
resistivity to degradation from high heat sources, namely the plasma within the discharge chamber and the heat from
the cathode assembly. The bottom magnet ring is aligned where the north pole is facing upwards, into the discharge
chamber. The middle ring has the north pole facing away from the center, and the top ring has the north pole pointed
inwards. The location and direction of the magnets were designed to create an even magnetic field distribution
within the chamber while having a high enough magnetic field strength at the surface of the magnetic cusp. These
are characteristics desirable for the performance and stability of the thruster. The one electromagnetic source in this
model is the heater which consists of a coiled wire around the tungsten cathode. Knowing the material and the
amperage of the heater, it is possible to model the heater as a low power electromagnet at the base of the thruster.
As with this magnetic model, an electrostatic model was build based on the same design geometry. In the
electrostatic model, the program is able to assign the blocks and boundaries potential values that would be generated
from the power supplies. With this, it is possible to set the potential of the screen and acceleration grids, the anode,
and the cathode and analyze the electrostatics of the ion thruster.

10
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Figure 4: FEMM model of the thruster structure colorized and annotated. Also shown are the placement
and orientation of the permanent magnets.

IV. Results and Verification
After creating the model, FEMM will create a mesh within the geometry and solve the magnetostatic or
electrostatic case for the entire thruster, inside and outside the discharge chamber. This provides the information
necessary to analyze the ionization process and thruster parameters within the discharge chamber and also magnetic
and electric effects outside the chamber. Many other models will not consider the attenuation and alterations that

11
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

arise when including ferrous metals other than the magnets, some of which can have a serious impact on overall
thruster performance.
A. Magnetostatic Solution
The magnetostatic solution as solved and displayed by FEMM is shown in the figure below. It is very apparent
the location of the permanent magnets and the ferrous metals serving as the magnet mounting surfaces. The color
within the thruster and walls represent the magnetic field strength while the lines represent the magnetic flux lines.

Figure 5: Using the FEMM solver to display the magnetic field within the entire
thruster.
It is very interesting to see how the shape and concentration of the magnetic field changes within the ferrous
brackets holding the permanent magnets. The field is guided through the higher relative permeability and
conductivity metals than it is in air. This results in the concentration of the magnetic fields within the ferrous
brackets, ultimately altering the field within the discharge chamber.
In order to analyze the magnetic field effects on the plasma in the discharge chamber, it was necessary to export
the magnetostatic results out of FEMM and into MatLab. FEMM has native support with LUA scripting, allowing
for transference of data between FEMM and MatLab in this manner.
The following figure is the magnetic strength of just the discharge chamber. As with the FEMM model, this
figure represents the axisymmetric magnetic field within the thruster with the left edge being the centerline of the

12
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

thruster, the right edge as the anode wall, and the top edge as the screen grid. The dimensions on the axes are in
millimeters.

Figure 6: The magnetic strength within the discharge chamber from all magnetic
sources.
It is apparent from this image that the high magnetic field strengths lie near the permanent magnets along the
walls and base. These high strength regions are right at the magnetic cusps and are necessary in determining the
primary electron loss area and probability of electron collision. The following graph is a plot of the magnetic field
strength as a function of distance along the right edge, the anode wall. This shows how the magnetic field changes
and clearly shows the spikes in strength right at the magnetic cusps. The non uniformity at the peaks is because of
the ferrous brackets changing the way the magnetic field extends into the discharge chamber. The maximum
magnetic field strength along the anode wall is 0.4043 Telsa (4043 Gauss).

13
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Figure 7: Magnetic field strength in Tesla along the right edge of the
discharge chamber, the anode wall
The following figure is the magnetic field strength along the bottom edge of the discharge chamber. It is
apparent from the image that the very low magnetic strength in the center of the thruster, the region occupied by the
cathode assembly and far away from the permanent magnets. It is desirable to have a low magnetic field strength at
the cathode assembly to ensure uniform electron emission and to not affect electron motion within the cathode. The
maximum magnetic field strength along the bottom edge wall is 0.2006 Telsa (2006 Gauss).

Figure 8: Magnetic field strength in Tesla along the bottom edge of the discharge
chamber, along the anode base and intersecting the cathode assembly

14
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

The following figure is the magnetic field strength along the center of the discharge chamber, the centerline axis
of the axisymmetric problem. The magnetic field strength is much smaller in comparison to the other two edges,
being on the order of 0.01 Tesla (100 Gauss). As mentioned before, the important design consideration concerning
the centerline magnetic field is to maintain a low and uniform magnetic field within the cathode. The non uniformity
present can cause oscillations of the electrons within the cathode, leading to lower electron emission and decreased
cathode life.

Figure 9: Magnetic field strength in Tesla along the centerline of the discharge
chamber
The results of this model are very similar to that of the model used in Knapp’s thesis in terms of magnetic
strength and field structure [3]. The maximum magnetic strength calculated at the wall in Knapp’s model was 3800
Gauss, slightly lower than this models value of 4043 Gauss, an error of 6.39%. One possible reason for this is the
fact that his model did not account for the alterations to the magnetic field due to the ferrous metal brackets holding
the magnets in place. The shape of the centerline magnetic field strength is relatively consistent with Knapp’s model
but the magnitudes are slightly different. The maximum strength along the centerline of this model was about 175
Gauss compared to the maximum strength of about 150 Gauss in Knapp’s model, an error of 16.67%. Again, this
small difference may be attributed to the consideration of the ferrous metal bracket.
B. Electrostatic Solution
The electrostatic solution of the thruster as solved by FEMM is displayed in the following figure. It is easy to
see the high relative potential of the screen and acceleration grids as opposed to the anode wall or the cathode. The
potentials and currents of the grids, anode, and cathode are chosen to be values that were used when testing the
thruster. These values allow for a good comparison to Knapp’s operational parameters and will be used to verify the
model in the next section [3].

15
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Figure 10: Electrostatic solution of the ion thruster as calculated by FEMM.

It is apparent from the image how the shape of the electric potential is dominated by the screen potential and
altered by the anode wall, curving off of the screen grid as though it were a plate capacitor while being pushed back
by the potential of the anode wall. Similar with the magnetostatic solution it was important to export the potentials
and electric fields out of FEMM and into MatLab for further analysis. The figures of the fields in MatLab are not
displayed because they do not convey any more information than the FEMM output does in this case.
C. Performance Characteristics
With the magnetic field strength and direction known and the geometry of the thruster established, it is possible
to now calculate some of the performance metrics described in previous sections. Namely, the probability of
collision of primary electrons, the theoretical thrust, the percent mass utilization, and the specific impulse are the
four properties analyzed within this research. Also calculated will be the Larmor radius of the electrons and ions to
ensure they are less than and greater than the characteristic length of the thruster, respectively.
The probability of electron collision is very important to consider for complete ionization of the fuel. Using the
equations shown in section II and the magnetic and electric field outputs from FEMM, the probability of electron
collision can be calculated. The magnetic and electric field values were determined at the magnetic cusps and the
characteristic lengths of the cusps were determined. The electron velocity at the cusps can be calculated by the
equation [2]
16
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

(16)
With the electron velocity and magnetic field at the cusps, the electron impact area
can be calculated and
inserted into the equation to calculate probability. The assumption of a neutral density value of 10 18 m-3 was used as
this is a value within the neutral density range of thrusters of this size [2]. To actually calculate this value is often
very complex and does vary within the discharge chamber. For the 0-dimensional assumption of this model, this
neutral density value is sufficient. Considering the three magnetic cusps independently and summing their effects,
the probability of primary electron collision for this configuration was determined to be 37.12%. Considering the
equations, it is apparent that this value is highly dependent upon the magnetic field strength at the cusps. The
magnetic and electric field strengths affect the electron velocity, with an increase in magnetic field strength
increasing the electron velocity. Coupled with the direct attenuation to the impact area, increasing the magnetic field
has a positive effect on the primary electron collision rate. The calculated value of collision probability has a 28.55% error to the calculated value of 52% in Knapp’s model [3]. As this value is highly dependent upon the
strength at the magnetic field at the cusps both through the attenuation of the apparent cusp area and the electron
velocity, the differences could possibly be attributed to the difference in magnetic field strengths between these two
models.
The second performance characteristic is that of mass utilization. This value is a function of beam current and
mass flow rate of the propellant. The beam current is a non trivial value to calculate and is often measured through
the use of a probe within the plasma, but can be estimated as 1/10 of the discharge current in larger ion thrusters [2].
For smaller ion thrusters, the beam current becomes a smaller fraction of the discharge current. To ensure results
along the lines of Knapp’s work, the discharge current is estimated at 1/20 that of the discharge current [3]. A
contour plot of the percent mass utilization is shown in the figure below.

Figure 11: Percent mass utilization as a function of beam current and propellant mass flow rate

It is apparent from this figure that an increase in percent mass utilization can be achieved be increasing the
beam current or decreasing the propellant mass flow rate. The mark on the graph represents a propellant mass flow
rate of 0.55 sccm and a beam current of 0.025 A .These values are representative of one of the test cases of the
17
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

thruster performed by Knapp. The percent mass utilization at this test point was 62.92%. This value has a 109.74%
error to the experimental value of 30% calculated by Knapp for the test case. This value’s dependent upon the beam
current means the error within this analysis may be from the assumptions necessary to make this calculation. With a
more refined calculation of the beam current, a more accurate and consistent value for mass utilization can be found.
The next parameter to analyze and measure of efficiency is the specific impulse, Isp, of the thruster. The Isp is
directly related to the mass efficiency of the thruster and the beam voltage. Neglecting ion optics losses in the
thruster, the beam voltage can be estimated by taking the difference in potentials between the screen and
acceleration grids. The following figure represents the theoretical Isp value for varying beam potentials and varying
mass utilizations.

Figure 12: Theoretical Isp as a function of beam potential and percent mass utilization

As can be seen from the figure, an increase in beam potential or an increase in percent mass utilization will
increase the Isp of the thruster. For the previously calculated and the beam voltage of the same test case of 700 V,
the theoretical Isp was calculated to be 2057.41 s. This value has a 37.16% error to the experimental value of 1500 s
estimated in the test case. As the Isp is directly related to the percent mass utilization, previously stated errors in this
number may be responsible for this difference.
Another performance metric calculated was thrust generated. As shown in section II, thrust is a function of
beam current and beam potential. To calculate this value, the same assumptions for the beam current and potential
were applied. The following figure represents the thrust of the micro ion thruster for varying beam potentials and
currents.
As can be seen in the figure, increasing either the beam potential or current will increase the thrust of this micro
ion thruster but at the cost of more power. For this test point that has been analyzed, the thrust was calculated to be
1.09 mN. This value has a -9.07% error to the experimental value of 1.2 mN determined in the test case. As the
thrust is directly related to the beam current, assumptions in the calculation of this number may be responsible for
this difference.

18
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

Figure 13: Thrust as a function of beam potential and beam current

D. Verification
Two other values were calculated to verify the operation and stable performance of the thruster, the electron and
ion Larmor radius. The equation to calculate these values are shown in section II. The design requires that the
Larmor radius of the electrons be less than the characteristic length of the thruster while the Larmor radius of the
ions must be larger than the characteristic length of the thruster. The electron Larmor radius was calculated to be
5.24 mm, which is less than the 35.5 mm characteristic length of the thruster. The ion Larmor radius was calculated
to be 126.19 mm, which is greater than the 35.5 mm characteristic length of the thruster. These values are a simple
method to verify the 0-dimensoinal assumptions that are made about the plasma.

V. Conclusion
The Cal Poly MiXI v3 is part of the first generation of micro ion thrusters designed to fill the 0.01-10 mN range
of electric propulsion systems. This technology is relatively undeveloped compared to other larger ion thrusters,
therefore the design and configuration of these thrusters is not well established or well refined. The goal of this
project was to design a set of tools that can be used to better and optimize thrusters in this class. With the design of a
thruster, the E&M structure can be modeled and analyzed and the performance characteristics of the thruster
determined.
The model and analysis tools created from this research are imperfect and still under development but do
calculate reasonable performance and operational values this thruster. There are refinements that need to be made to
accurately calculate thruster performance values and operational parameters. There were numerous assumptions that
were made where the implications of said assumptions should be explored, ultimately removing some assumptions
entirely to create a better and more accurate model. With a higher understanding of plasma physics and
magnetohydrodynamics, more accurate plasma calculations can be created and used.
With this and a further set of calculations of performance and plasma parameters, changes to the existing
architecture can be made and the resulting operation analyzed. Ideally, with a full understanding of every aspect of
the operation of the thruster, an optimization routine can be created to determine the optimal design of the E&M
fields of the thruster, the fuel input, the physical structure, etc. for a desired performance. The goal of these
19
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

alterations would be to increase primary electron collision rates and percent utilization, increasing the Isp and thrust,
and reducing power consumption overall to make a more efficient and optimized flight ready micro ion thruster.

VI. Future Work
There are several areas of this project that require future work. Gaining a further understanding of the plasma
physics and the ion motion of the plasma will allow for more precise and accurate calculations of performance
parameters. Currently there are assumptions that limit the precision of the analysis that should be addressed. A more
complete understanding of the plasma physics will allow for better calculations of the plasma density and
temperature, the ion beam current and potential, and the ion optics associated with the plasma beam passing through
the screen and acceleration grids.
Important to future work on this project is the understanding of the thermal effects of the plasma on the
permanent magnets. With the high heat required to discharge ions from the cathode and the internal heat of the
plasma, the anode will heat up to significant temperatures and can potentially demagnetize the permanent magnets,
rendering the thruster non operational. Changes to materials or the physical design of the structure may assist in the
dissipation of heat, but these changes need to consider the effect on the operation and performance of the thruster.
Another potential area of future work is the construction of a test apparatus that allows for easy but precise
changes to the thruster in terms of the magnetic structure. Such a device would allow for actual testing of computer
modeled and simulated scenarios.

20
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

VII. References
[1] Wirz, Richard E; “Discharge Plasma Processes of Ring-Cusp Ion Thrusters” California Institute of Technology,
Pasadena, California, 2005
[2] Goebel, Dan M.; Katz, Ira; “Fundamentals of Electric Propulsion” John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey,
2008
[3] Knapp, David W; “Development, Design, and Test of a Miniature Xenon Ion Thruster (MiXI)” Master’s Thesis;
California State University San Luis Obispo, San Luis Obispo, California, 2012
[4] D. Meeker, "Finite Element Method Magnetics: Version 4.2 User's Manual," 16 October 2010. [Online].
<http://www.femm.info/Archives/doc/manual42.pdf>
[5] R. D. Knight, Physics for Scientists and Engineers, San Francisco, CA: Pearson Education, Inc., 2004.
[6] Ion Propulsion System Hot Fire Test for Deep Space 1, NASA/JPL.
<http://dawn.jpl.nasa.gov/mission/ion_prop.asp>
[7] Ion Propulsion, Glenn Research Center. <http://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/technology/Ion_Propulsion1.html>
[8] Ion Thruster, Wikipedia. < http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ion_thruster>

21
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics

